Figure 7.1 Cloud computing and the development of cloud infrastructure are critical to delivering software applications securely,
more rapidly, and continuously. (credit: modification of work "Cloud" by James Cridland/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Chapter Outline
7.1 Fundamentals of Cloud Computing
7.2 Cloud Computing Services, Pricing, and Deployment Models
7.3 Cloud Computing Technologies
7.4 Cloud-Based Industry Applications
7.5 Scientific, Industrial, and Social Implications of Cloud Computing
Introduction
Organizations are facing more pressure today to retain customers who depend on updated or new business
capabilities. This requires organizations to deliver software applications securely, more rapidly, and
continuously. For organizations to adapt existing applications or build new applications using the cloud, they
must abide by a different set of constraints to leverage cloud infrastructure in comparison to traditional on-
premise infrastructure.
Cloud computing offers the ability to access information via the internet at any time of day, from any device,
and from any location. Before the cloud existed, transferring large amounts of data required physical external
storage devices. The limitation of carrying data on a physical drive meant that employees could not work
remotely and maintain access to all necessary information when away from the office. There was also not yet a
means for customers to access banking information from an app, to shop online from a laptop, or to write an
essay using Google Docs from a desktop computer. Cloud computing changed all of that, and it enriched the
depth and breadth of information systems (IS) development and efficacy in the modern business world.
Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
7

7.1 Fundamentals of Cloud Computing
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define cloud computing and its relevance to the organization
•
Compare and contrast cloud computing and in-house hosting
•
Discuss the role of information systems professionals in cloud computing
The application of cloud computing offers businesses the ability to add, expand, or modify systems to be used
in accounting, human resources, and daily operations. Consider Google Drive, for example, which a user can
access from their smartphone to create and save a document. That user can then allow another user to access
and modify that document from another device. Google Docs also allows multiple people to work together
within the same document at the same time. Such advantages give cloud computing the ability to help an
organization work more effectively and efficiently.
Cloud Computing and Its Relevance to the Organization
Consider a situation in which an organization is faced with the need to rapidly expand a new product line,
which could increase the company’s competitive advantage in their industry. What is the timeline to purchase
physical equipment and install, configure, implement, and support the needed resources, including human
resources? Depending on the organization’s purchasing requirements, it could be a minimum of thirty days to
push a purchase order through, if funding is available. Depending on the amount of equipment ordered,
delivery may take forty-five to sixty days or more. Once the equipment is received, there is the configuration
and implementation aspect of the project. This step depends on the abilities of the staff and whether there are
special application requirements, testing, or piloting of the resources.
Take the same project and consider how it may look different if it is planned and executed in the context of
cloud computing, often referred to simply as “the cloud,” which is information technology (IT) resources that
are available through the internet on an on-demand or pay-as-you-go basis without the users needing to
manage it. The organization would need a cloud provider, a company that provides on-demand services such
as data storage, applications, and infrastructure in a platform accessible through the internet. Once the
organization has a cloud provider, it then becomes a cloud consumer, which is an entity that uses and
maintains access to the computing resources of a cloud provider. The organization can use the cloud provider’s
portal to order, build, configure, and implement the needed infrastructure, which is the facility and system
used to support an organization’s operations. The organization can then use a portal to complete the same
build, configuration, software installation, testing, and piloting to be accomplished in the physical environment
(Figure 7.2).
Figure 7.2 A cloud-based environment connects a cloud consumer to cloud components like servers and firewalls via the internet.
256
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license; credit “File server”: modification of work “Simpleicons
Interface folder-open-shape” by SimpleIcon/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0; credit “Application server”: modification of work
“Application Server” by Openclipart/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit “Database Server”: modification of work “Database
Server” by Openclipart/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit “Infrastructure”: modification of work “Network (22612) – The
Noun Project by Ann Fandrey/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0; credit “Router”: modification of work “Router (16624) – The Noun
Project” by Christopher Pond/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0; credit “Firewall”: modification of work “Firewall (computing)” by
Openclipart/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
The organization will need to determine the competitive advantage of each approach to expanding to a new
product line. It might take several months if the organization decides to use their own infrastructure to
implement an on-premise environment, which is the physical hardware, such as servers, network equipment,
and workstations. The cost of that implementation could occur concurrently to the rollout of a new product
line that the system will support, thus maximizing the capital expenditure for the project (Figure 7.3). The cloud
scenario, which could be implemented in days rather than months, might meet the immediate needs of a new
project that must adhere to specific deadlines that do not offer an extended amount of start-up time.
Figure 7.3 An on-premise environment is connected to the internet through a firewall, and network traffic passes through a router
and switch. The infrastructure consists of application, file, FTP, email, print, and database servers. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license; credit "Firewall": modification of work “Firewall (computing)” by Openclipart/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain; credit "Router": modification of work "Router (16624) - The Noun Project" by Christopher Pond/Wikimedia
Commons, CC0 1.0; credit "Switch": modification of work "Noun Project switch icon" by "IconMark"/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0;
credit "Application server": modification of work "Application server" by Openclipart/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit "File
server": modification of work “Simpleicons Interface folder-open-shape” by SimpleIcon/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0; credit "FTP
server" and "Database server": modification of work “Database Server” by Openclipart/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit
"Email server": modification of work "E-mail-server" by Openclipart/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit "Print server":
modification of work "Fax server" by Openclipart/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
Cloud computing environments and on-premise environments have the same functionality, but they have
some fundamental differences. One main difference is the physical environment. In an on-premise facility, an
organization owns and manages their own infrastructure. In a cloud environment, the cloud provider owns,
operates, and manages the computing equipment. Both computing environments have a physical hardware
component, yet the cloud environment offers services to the cloud consumers using virtualization, in which a
physical computer environment creates a simulated computer environment (Figure 7.4). Virtualization
software takes physical hardware, such as a server, and converts it to resources that are then reallocated
through code to re-create an IT resource that functions in the same manner as the physical equivalent.
7.1 • Fundamentals of Cloud Computing
257

Figure 7.4 An interface virtualizes the resources, such as CPUs, RAM, network, and, in some cases, storage, of the physical server. It
divides these resources while allocating what is needed for each computer accessing the server. (credit: modification of work from
Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
In an on-premise environment, the organization provides access to the different platforms, such as Exchange,
file, and database, and applications, such as email, the web, and data entry. Access to the internet occurs
through the on-premise network infrastructure and is monitored and maintained by the organization.
In a cloud environment, the cloud provider owns and manages physical hardware to deliver virtualized access
through the internet to the server, network equipment, and workstations. The cloud environment can support
access via any device, from any location, at any time based on the contracted services the cloud consumer
purchases. For example, a cloud environment in a school allows a student to review their grades at any time.
The student can use their smartphone to access the school portal, and with the correct credentials, they can
log in and access the platform that houses their grades.
Cloud environments are based on the services the cloud provider offers to the cloud consumer. Amazon Web
Services (also known as AWS or AWS Marketplace) provides many services based on the categories the cloud
consumer procures. Some of the service categories are operating systems, security, networking, and storage.
Though companies, such as AWS, Google, and Microsoft Azure, offer a wide range of services, some cloud
environments specialize in services that meet a single requirement for a cloud consumer. One example of a
single service is a development environment, such as those provided by DigitalOcean. This environment allows
developers to build a web and application platform that can be scaled to their needs and can run
independently from their production environment.
Data storage is a problem that all organizations face—from how much they create to how long they should
retain it. The amount of data generated is relevant to their customer base, products, and services. This, in turn,
creates an issue with determining the amount of storage required at any given time. Cloud storage offers
organizations the opportunity to implement accessible elastic storage, meaning that it can expand or collapse
based on demand. Cloud providers such as Wasabi Technologies (also known as Wasabi) specialize in offering
only storage environments, such as hot site storage, network-attached storage, and data lakes. In hot site
storage, mission-critical data are stored in one location where the organization can have immediate access to
the data. In network-attached storage (NAS), the storage system is flexible and attaches to an organization’s
network infrastructure. In a data lake, large amounts of structured and unstructured data are stored in a
repository.
Cloud Computing Compared to On-Premises Hosting
There are several advantages and disadvantages of cloud computing. First, consider the difference between an
organization that has on-premise equipment and one that uses a cloud computing environment. Each
organization has data storage, website hosting, and system availability for an end user, or the entity that
makes use of the technology provided by an organization.
258
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

When organizations have their own equipment to provide the services to their end users on-premise, the
organization manages, maintains, and supports all services in-house. These services are dependent on the
services the organization provides to their customers and the industry in which they operate. The support of
these services includes, but is not limited to, the facility, utilities, hardware, software, and other equipment
necessary to perform the functions the end users need to complete their job function. In most cases, the
company has its own personnel to support the equipment and services necessary to support the technology
and systems the organization operates, such as Active Directory services, website development, and data
storage.
In cloud computing, the resources are located external to the organization’s facilities and accessed through the
internet. According to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), “Cloud computing is a model
for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable computing
resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and
released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.”1 According to this definition, there
are five essential characteristics: on-demand self-service, broad network access, resource pooling, rapid
elasticity, and measured service; three service models: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service
(PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS); and four deployment models: community cloud, private cloud, public
cloud, and hybrid cloud2 (Figure 7.5).
Figure 7.5 The NIST Cloud Computing Model is composed of five essential characteristics, three service models, and four
deployment models. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Cloud computing infrastructure is based on a physical environment that uses virtualization technology to
expand the capabilities of the physical equipment. Virtualization offers the cloud environment scalability,
which is the ability of the resource to be scaled up or down with minimal effort, as well as flexibility, access to
system resources, and a cost factor based on services that are contracted. The process of virtualization
requires a platform to operate the virtual infrastructure, another platform that creates the virtual
environment, and a service to manage the virtualized resources.
There are many server virtualization software companies, such as VMware, Microsoft, SUSE Linux, and Citrix.
Each server virtualization software package offers different features (such as resource allocation, high
availability, and centralized management) based on the cloud environment that is to be created according to
the cloud consumer’s needs.
1
NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap Working Group, “The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” in NIST Cloud Computing
Standards Roadmap, NIST Special Publication 500-291, Version 2, National Institute of Standards and Technology, July 2013,
https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/itl/cloud/NIST_SP-500-291_Version-2_2013_June18_FINAL.pdf, 2.
2
NIST Cloud Computing Standards Roadmap Working Group, “The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” in NIST Cloud Computing
Standards Roadmap, NIST Special Publication 500-291, Version 2, National Institute of Standards and Technology, July 2013,
https://www.nist.gov/system/files/documents/itl/cloud/NIST_SP-500-291_Version-2_2013_June18_FINAL.pdf.
7.1 • Fundamentals of Cloud Computing
259

FUTURE TECHNOLOGY
Cloud Computing and Generative AI
Cloud computing has a solid place in the computing world, which has led to new applications for hybrid
clouds, multicloud environments, and now, generative AI. Cloud providers can integrate generative AI into
their platforms, providing AI-as-a-Service and thereby making it more accessible and usable for
organizations. Having generative AI as part of a cloud provider’s platform allows an organization the
flexibility to use it in many different applications, such as content creation, data analysis, and more. Cloud
infrastructure will continue to scale and optimize to support the massive computational demands of
training and running generative AI models, allowing businesses to focus on leveraging generative AI
without worrying about underlying technical details. Further, the accessibility of generative AI in cloud
computing can help promote innovation, especially in fields that previously may not have had access to the
technology. The future of cloud computing and generative AI is a dynamic, evolving landscape that
promises to revolutionize industries, increase accessibility, and drive innovation. With advancements in
scalability, cost-efficiency, AI ethics, and automation, cloud environments will continue to serve as the
foundation for generative AI technologies, making it easier and more powerful for organizations to
leverage AI in creative and transformative ways.
The Role of Information Systems Professionals in Cloud Computing
The cloud network infrastructure has evolved from the traditional physical network to software-defined
networks. A software-defined network (SDN) is a network that uses software for traffic management in
programmable controllers and interfaces. The evolution to SDNs means that the roles and specialties of IS
professionals have also evolved. Network engineering, systems administration, and cybersecurity are a few of
the important specialties involved in cloud computing. A network engineer is the person with the skill to
design, implement, and manage a network in support of an organization’s mission. They will need to
understand not only networking principles but also virtualization, coding languages (such as Java, JavaScript,
and Python), and server administration. The system administrator is the person who manages and maintains
the IT and IS resources for an organization. They will need to handle server administration, and they will also
have to know the different operating systems and the virtualization system management interfaces. An
operating system (OS) is the software installed on a computer system, such as Windows, Linux, or Unix, that
manages the resources. The system administrator will need to be proficient in server virtualization software,
coding languages, and platform-specific applications.
A cybersecurity specialist is a person who identifies and develops security strategies, verifies needed security
improvements, and implements security strategies for an organization. This position needs a person who can
recognize the possible risks that an organization might encounter. People pursuing cybersecurity need to
understand cyber threats, and they will also need to know networking, system operations, physical security,
and information security. According to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, cybersecurity positions should grow
33 percent between 2023 and 2033.3
CAREERS IN IS
Cloud Computing Employment
There are many career opportunities in the field of cloud computing. The types of jobs that are available
range from network engineers, who manage networks, to software developers, who maintain IS and IT
3
Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Information Security Analysts,” Occupational Outlook Handbook, U.S. Department of Labor, last
modified August 29, 2024, https://www.bls.gov/ooh/computer-and-information-technology/information-security-analysts.htm
260
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

resources, to cybersecurity specialists, who develop security strategies. Individual employers have different
requirements for the type of IS personnel they need, so even after choosing a specialty and earning a
degree, you may need additional education, certifications, or experience. Certification requirements may
include those related to specific software or hardware manufacturers. Because of the nature of the
specialties in the field of cloud computing, it is important to research employers’ requirements to ensure
you have the qualifications they are seeking.
Case Study: Using the Cloud to Prepare for a Natural Disaster
When dealing with IT resources, anything can change how a company does business. Consider the city of
Houston, Texas, which must be prepared for a natural disaster, such as a hurricane. As a result of hurricanes
that have affected Texas in the past, the state government has had to shut down, and employees have had to
relocate. In such a scenario, the concern becomes how to serve the citizens of Texas who depend on the state
for their benefits. With employees and clients relocated, it becomes more complicated for the state to provide
services with locally maintained databases and client information. The state can take a wait-and-see approach
and delay services until the data centers become operational again. Another option might be for the state to
acquire new IT resources and set up new data centers in an area less prone to hurricanes, which takes time,
funds, personnel, and additional facilities. A third option might be for the state to transition to a cloud-based
environment, which will take time to develop, implement, and roll out. The time constraints and cost factors
for the third option are significantly less, and the need for a facility is nullified. The state government will need
to evaluate and justify each option, based on the criticality of the state’s operational needs and the needs of
the clients.
All three scenarios meet the organization’s needs, so the justification process will involve the availability of
funds, personnel, and facilities. A major portion of the justification will be to consider the time frame the
organization needs to return to an operational status. With a wait-and-see approach, there is no planning for
how long it will take to return to normal operations. The time frame needed for an on-premise resource
environment to return to normal operations is based on the availability of the needed resources, delivery
timelines, qualified personnel, and facilities. The time frame needed for a cloud-based resource environment
to return to normal operations is usually shorter and may be days instead of weeks or months. The funds
needed for an on-premise environment are usually greater than those of the cloud-based environment, and
depending on the funding structure of the organizations, a lower-cost solution may be approved without
major effort.
With the introduction of cloud-based resources, organizations now have a new component to add to their tools
for IS operations. The concept of IS operations requires an organization to make allowances and plans for
downtime scenarios. One course of action is business continuity, which is a plan that an organization puts in
place to maintain its operational status in an emergency scenario. The plan requires the company to inventory
its IS resources, validate the requirements for its users, and develop a plan to address the needs should an
outage occur. The plan would provide details for how the outage is to be handled, who is involved to assist in
the outage, and what steps should be taken to restore services.
The other course of action is plans for disaster recovery, the process an organization follows to reestablish
operational status after an incident causes a system failure. This plan is more detailed than the business
continuity plan, yet it uses some of the same information as the business continuity plan. The difference
between the two plans is that the disaster recovery plan takes into account a system failure that prevents
operations at a large scale. For example, a network outage would fall under business continuity, whereas the
crash of a database server could be classified as disaster recovery if there is not a backup database server.
The cloud-based environment offers companies additional options for doing business on a regular basis and in
an emergency transition scenario. It provides the organization with a methodology for designing new
7.1 • Fundamentals of Cloud Computing
261

resources, implementing new resources, or even creating a resource environment to use in business continuity
and disaster recovery that includes business impact analysis and incident handling processes.
7.2 Cloud Computing Services, Pricing, and Deployment Models
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss how cloud services are delivered and priced
•
Identify major cloud service providers and their delivery models
Delivery models that service providers use to support the cloud consumer vary based on the needs of the
cloud consumer. Advances in technology and the growth of the cloud environment have led to the
development of new service models. Each evolution in technology offers advancements in service deliverables
that the cloud provider can offer cloud consumers. Today’s cloud environment is much different from the
earliest version when operations began to move to the cloud.
Cloud consumers now have many options for choosing a hosting platform when pursuing a move,
transformation, or implementation of a cloud platform for their organization. The cost for the platform is one
of the factors that an organization will consider when determining whether the cloud solution is the
technology the organization needs to gain a competitive advantage. Each organization has different
technology requirements, and the cloud provides an opportunity for the organizations to challenge
themselves to move with innovation.
Deployment and Pricing of Cloud Services
Cloud services are provided using a delivery model, which includes the resources offered by the cloud
provider, and a deployment model, which includes the location, the method, and the entity responsible for
controlling the infrastructure. The primary delivery models are broken down into Infrastructure as a Service,
Platform as a Service, and Software as a Service. The Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) model involves the
provision of infrastructure resources, such as networking and storage. The Platform as a Service (PaaS)
model manages the software and hardware resources for the purpose of development. Software as a Service
(SaaS) is the delivery of applications in the cloud. Each of the delivery models has a specific function when it
comes to building cloud services, but they are all subscription-based processes of delivering infrastructure,
network, and applications, which is why they are all considered “as a Service.” All three delivery models are
scalable up or down, and are available on-demand to the cloud consumer. The delivery models are built on top
of each other in a layered approach to building the cloud environment. The other factors in a cloud
environment that are customizable for cloud consumers are the specifications, such as processing power, RAM,
storage, and applications.
Infrastructure as a Service is the first level of the cloud environment that must be designed based on the
requirements of the cloud consumer. This service can include, but is not limited to, raw IT resources, such as
compute resources, which include the specific operating systems, the hardware components, and the network
systems, such as connectivity. The functionality of the IaaS environment provides the needed control over the
cloud structure while also providing the cloud consumer the ability to configure and utilize the IaaS
functionality to its fullest. The IaaS environment consists of the virtual server, which is leased through the
cloud provider based on memory, the CPU, and storage.
Platform as a Service is typically the second level of the cloud environment and is built in relation to the IaaS
component. This service is a preconfigured environment that supports a cloud consumer’s operational needs.
The PaaS delivery model can be as simple as file services, such as storage of data files on a file server, or as
complex as database services with business intelligence used for business analysis. This portion of the delivery
model requires the cloud consumer to identify specific tasks that are associated with their operational
requirements, such as extending an existing on-premise resource by creating a secondary backup system in
262
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

the cloud, or replacing an existing IS. The PaaS offers the cloud consumer the opportunity to configure the
prebuilt environments and removes some of the complexity involved in configuring an IaaS environment with
a bare metal server, which is a physical server deployed for a single customer that provides the customer full
access to the server resources.
Software as a Service offers a wide range of available products to cloud consumers, which embodies the
essence of cloud computing: to make as many services as possible available to as many consumers as
possible. A wide range of products exist in the cloud computing environment. Depending on the product,
cloud providers can offer leases for the use of different services on different terms based on the needs of the
cloud consumer. Figure 7.6 shows all three levels of delivery models.
Figure 7.6 The base level of the cloud environment is IaaS, the second is PaaS, and the top is SaaS. Each level stacks on the one
below it so that they work together to form the foundation and ultimately enable the cloud consumer to build, develop, and deploy
the software applications they need to operate. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
As the availability of newer technologies has grown and evolved (processors with more cores, faster GPUs),
cloud providers have gained access to many new offerings. These offerings have changed the possibilities for
the cloud consumer when it comes to adding their cloud environment. Some of these new offerings are
Database as a Service (DBaaS), which is a service that gives cloud consumers the ability to manage and
maintain relational and nonrelational databases; Communication as a Service (CaaS), which is a service that
allows for the cloud-based delivery of services such as Voice over Internet Protocol, videoconferencing, and
internet-based telecommunication services; and Testing as a Service (TaaS), which is a service that cloud
providers have built to outsource testing of software, applications, and other components that would normally
be performed within the organization.
Each of the delivery models has components that are subject to a contract requirement that is supported with
a service-level agreement (SLA), a document that outlines the levels of service that a cloud provider assures
the cloud consumer they will receive. The SLA is used as a point of reference for the daily operation of a cloud
consumer’s environment. Each cloud provider has a monitoring tool in place to determine the level of service
provided, and there are often penalties listed in the SLA that can apply if the cloud provider fails to meet the
required levels of service.
The cloud provider will establish the usage parameters in the contract for billing purposes. The usage
parameters are needed to determine the cost of the cloud-based services. The services range in cost based on
the usage by the cloud consumer as they pertain to the infrastructure, platform, and software requirements. A
usage charge is usually calculated per hour based on the service, and the cloud consumer will incur additional
charges if the usage level is exceeded. An example of this would be a per-hour charge for the service with a set
number of transactions. Once the number of transactions is reached, there will be an additional transaction
charge, which may be per transaction or may be a tiered amount for a certain number of additional
transactions.
7.2 • Cloud Computing Services, Pricing, and Deployment Models
263

Each service that is offered has a predetermined rate, which is calculated based on the cloud consumer’s
location. The rates are charged on a 24/7 basis as outlined in the cloud consumer’s contract. The rates may
change based on the locations of the cloud-based environment and which location or locations the consumer
uses. For example, the IaaS may be located in San Antonio, Texas, and the PaaS is located in Seattle,
Washington, and the SaaS is located in Boston, Massachusetts. Cloud-based services may also be located
globally, so the cloud consumer can use all the U.S.-based sites for their basic delivery models and have their
backup run to Singapore.
There are four major cloud deployment models: community cloud, an infrastructure shared by multiple
organizations with a common interest; private cloud, an infrastructure dedicated to a single organization;
public cloud, an infrastructure that provides services in an on-demand environment; and hybrid cloud, a
combination of the public and private models that can be combined with on-premise infrastructure. Each of
the models is deployed based on the access needs, who is to be the owner of the environment, and the size of
the environment.
A community cloud environment is one that is owned by a specific community or a cloud provider that is
offering services to that community (Figure 7.7). Access to the community cloud is limited to the community
that built and manages the cloud environment, such as a university with multiple campuses or a firm with
multiple office locations. Membership is granted to those outside the community at the discretion of the
community, and access is controlled by the community. Since community clouds are shared by organizations in
the same industry, those that do business in a certain sector, such as education, must adhere to certain sector-
specific regulations for their entire cloud.
Figure 7.7 The structure of a community cloud is dependent on the requirements of the community of organizations that establish
the cloud-based environment. The organizer of the community is the authority of the systems used in the cloud. (credit: modification
of work from Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
A public cloud environment is designed by a provider that wants to offer services to consumers (Figure 7.8).
Based on the provisioning of the cloud environment, the cloud provider can offer access at a cost to
consumers or as a service through other avenues, such as a search engine offering an analytics service to
cloud consumers who want to leverage their offering. Google Cloud’s search engine is an example of a public
264
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

cloud. It is open access, but users can access additional features by signing in. The cloud provider that
develops the public cloud environment is responsible for ongoing maintenance, operations, customer support,
and availability. Depending on the offering, the provider will design and implement an architecture to support
the consumer’s needs.
Figure 7.8 Cloud-based environments are available to individuals and business users and can be accessed in the public cloud. Access
to the cloud-based environment is dependent on the policies that are imposed by individual providers. (credit: modification of work
from Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
GLOBAL CONNECTIONS
Global Use of Search Engines
The public cloud provides access to information throughout the world. Each public cloud provider has
domain locations that allow for global access. For example, Google hosts its own search engines in its cloud
infrastructure. Because the company is based in the United States, the domain name for the Google search
engine is google.com, but when users access Google in another country, the domain name has a country
code appended to it. For example, in Mexico, the domain is google.com.mx. Using country-specific domains
allows Google to tailor the search engine to adhere to laws and regulations in that country and to offer
results in the country’s language or languages, while ensuring all of their global users have access to a
similar search engine.
A private cloud environment is designed by an organization based on its need for its own cloud environment
(Figure 7.9). The private cloud provides access to resources that can be used and previsioned by the level,
locations, and needs of the different parts of the organization. Whether its IS resources are internal or
external, the management of the private cloud is the responsibility of the organization. What distinguishes this
cloud environment is that the organization is both the provider and consumer of the environment.
7.2 • Cloud Computing Services, Pricing, and Deployment Models
265

Figure 7.9 A private cloud-based environment incorporates a cloud-based database service. The purpose of the environment
determines the configuration of the services and information technology resources that are built into the cloud-based environment.
Private cloud environments are built to a specific cloud customer, and only that cloud customer has access to the environment.
(credit: modification of work from Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
4.0 license)
Hybrid cloud environments are designed through the use of several deployment models (Figure 7.10). The
most common hybrid cloud environment combines the deployment of a private cloud with controlled access
with a public cloud without access requirements. This provides the organization with one environment for
sensitive or confidential information and one for general use. The hybrid cloud can be a challenge to create
because it requires the integration of two independent environments, which can be a website in the public
cloud and a database service in the private cloud, that may be spread across different cloud providers.
Figure 7.10 Depending on the requirements of the cloud consumer, the cloud-based environment can be a combination of private
and public. The hybrid cloud can also combine an on-premise and cloud-based environment. (credit: modification of work from
Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
266
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

When a cloud consumer is determining the value of employing a cloud environment, there are several factors
they must consider, such as cost, services, and networking. The cost factors will require the involvement of
senior management and finance because the organization will need to determine the different types of cloud
environments, the different requirements of the environments, the level of support needed internally and
externally, and the differences between the cloud provider’s offerings.
An organization may choose a hybrid cloud environment so that it can control access to its information based
on customer profiles. For example, if a retailer sells TVs, it might list models that are priced similarly to its
competitors on its public website as part of the public portion of its hybrid cloud. The retailer might not
advertise some other models that are at a special price that is only accessible to customers after they sign in to
the private portion of the hybrid cloud. Similarly, a company may have a public site for direct sales to
consumers, and a private site for retail merchants purchasing their goods wholesale.
LINK TO LEARNING
Hybrid cloud environments can be especially beneficial for organizations that have sensitive data and also
want to increase sales to their customers. Read this article describing the ways banks can leverage AI and
machine learning in a hybrid cloud (https://openstax.org/r/109AIHybridCld) to improve fraud detection and
customer experience overall, while protecting their sensitive data and adhering to industry regulations.
Organizations will need to determine the need to move to a cloud-based environment or maintain an on-
premise IT environment by conducting a feasibility study. This study should include but is not limited to
considering up-front and ongoing costs as well as capital expenditures. An up-front cost is one that must be
expended for services before delivery. Up-front costs are analyzed for both the on-premise and cloud
environments, as they pertain to startup, hardware, integration, and implementation, among other expenses.
An ongoing cost is one that must be expended for day-to-day operations. Ongoing costs are associated with
software licensing, hardware maintenance, utilities, and labor. A capital expenditure is the cost for the
acquisition of assets. Capital expenditures are those funds that are used to acquire value for the organization.
Each organization sets the number of purchases to determine as such. Since each IT environment and cloud
environment varies, the total cost of ownership, which is the investment in a product for the lifetime of the
product, and the return on investment (ROI), which is a metric that determines the value of an investment,
will vary because of the differences in the cloud-based environment developed by the cloud consumer.
Major Cloud Service Providers and Their Delivery Models
The growth of cloud environments has been spurred by consumers wanting access to services that could
provide more connections, such as a mobile app that searches the local eateries and then gives them access to
the restaurant’s menu. Organizations such as Amazon, Google, and Microsoft started small and have
developed their own cloud-based environments that have changed the way organizations do business, moved
the e-commerce space forward in time, and provided access to the world around us.
Amazon Web Services grew out of an internal need for Amazon to have the IT resources to manage and
maintain its own IS environment. Amazon has taken its proprietary technology and grown the company into a
cloud provider that offers services for other organizations to use so that they do not need to manage or
maintain any on-premise systems. Amazon Web Services provides services such as computing, network
service, databases, and storage; computing tools for organizations for analytics and machine learning; and
services to help organizations with security, identity protection, and compliance.
Google evolved from a search engine to another cloud provider. Just like AWS, Google provides computing,
storage, database, and networking services. Google Cloud provides its consumers with operations,
development, and analytics tools. Google has also developed AI to simulate human intelligence and has
created solutions using generative AI offerings. Google’s offerings are built around its own cloud environment.
7.2 • Cloud Computing Services, Pricing, and Deployment Models
267

Just like AWS and Google, Microsoft Azure offers computing, databases, networking, and storage. Microsoft
Azure made progress in the AI realm with services that combine it with other technology. Each offering by
Microsoft Azure is built on Microsoft’s foundation.
Amazon Web Services, Google, and Microsoft Azure all offer certifications in their respective platforms.
Amazon Web Services offers multiple certification levels: foundation, professional, associate, and specialty.
Each of the certificates is knowledge and role based, depending on the goal of the certification. Google offers
foundational, associate, and professional certifications as well. Google structures its certifications around
knowledge, fundamental skills, and technical skills. Microsoft also offers certification tracks in other areas of its
products, such as AI, to support its cloud environment.
CAREERS IN IS
What Are Information Systems Certifications?
When looking at a career in IS, check out certification expectations with companies such as AWS and
Google. These sites show some of the certifications that the industry often requires for a person to work in
a cloud-based environment. There are certificates that are offered by the cloud-based providers, such as
AWS and Google. There are also certifications that are designed around industry-based knowledge, like the
Cloud+ certification offered by CompTIA. It is common for organizations in the industry to identify specific
certifications in their job listings so that they can hire people who already have cloud, security, or project
management certifications. Obtaining certifications appropriate for your preferred role before seeking
employment can make you a more viable candidate for an open position.
The big cloud providers such as AWS, Google, and Microsoft offer a wide range of services to cloud consumers.
However, there are smaller cloud providers that specialize in specific services. These smaller companies offer
the cloud consumer an alternative to using mainstream providers. For example, DigitalOcean offers
development environments that are focused on only development, and Wasabi only offers cloud-based
storage. These specialized services provide more options to the cloud consumer, so they may need to do
additional research to determine whether their needs are best met by a provider that can offer a variety of
services or one that specializes in one service.
Organizations in today’s business environment have to stay competitive in order to continue to grow and
operate. This is sometimes identified as a competitive advantage, the factor that allows one company to make
products or offer services more efficiently and effectively than its competitors. One advantage an organization
might investigate is how it deploys IT resources over its competitors. Information technology resources are a
cost factor that must be considered when determining the advantage one company might have over another.
An organization may choose to add to their competitive advantage by moving into a new area of its market
share, which is the sales that a company has in its industry, usually calculated as a percentage. This move will
require additional IT resources to support the initiative.
The organization can follow two courses of action to select their service provider: issue a request for quote,
which is the process for determining the pricing of IT resources based on the organization’s understanding of
what is needed, or a request for proposal, which is documentation of the details of a project, including the IT
resources that might be needed, in order to support the bidding process to get a fair and competitive price.
Both processes will provide the organization with information about the possible up-front cost to start the
project and the ongoing cost of maintenance for the IT resources.
The benefit of going through the bidding process is that it will help the organization identify the capital
expenditures that are needed to accomplish the project. This step is needed to determine if sufficient funds
are available. The next step, confirming the total cost of ownership of the IT resources, is needed to validate
268
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

the availability of funds in the projected budgets for subsequent fiscal years. Once the total cost of ownership
is determined, then the organization can evaluate the return on the investment of the IT resources that are
purchased. The return on investment will influence the total cost of producing a product, entering a market, or
introducing a new service.
7.3 Cloud Computing Technologies
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the technology components in cloud computing
•
Discuss migration strategies and best practices
•
Identify cloud-based standards in industry
The technical components of cloud computing range from advances in networking to the possibilities of
virtualization. For each aspect of cloud computing technology, there is a component that creates a feature,
service, or tool that a consumer needs. These components interlock to build the foundation for cloud
computing.
When organizations choose to migrate their systems, data, and services to the cloud, they should identify and
follow best practices. Each organization will develop its own best practices based on trial and error, lessons
learned, and the plans that other organizations have used. Each organization will build its migration strategies
to accomplish its goal, which is to have a successful transformation to the cloud.
As part of any transition in service, an organization will need to verify the applicable industry standards and
regulatory requirements and ensure they adhere to them. There may be international, federal, and state
regulatory requirements they need to follow.
Technology Components in Cloud Computing
Since the development of the cloud environment, there has been specific network architecture needed, such
as more availability to control the flow of data, how it manages access to the applications, and bandwidth
capabilities. Traditional network architectures did not meet these requirements, which led to the development
of SDNs. The SDNs changed the way networking components worked and handled traffic, and they opened
new methods of controlling the network architecture. The SDNs move from the proprietary software and
configurations of network equipment manufacturers to develop a mechanism to enable control at specific
levels of the network architecture. The other aspect of SDNs is their ability to virtualize the network
infrastructure, enabling the network manager to control the network infrastructure from the SDN controller
(Figure 7.11). The SDN controller provides centralized management of the network environment, the
application layer manages the applications and provides information to the SDN controller regarding the
needs of the applications, and the infrastructure layer is the layer where the physical network hardware
resides.
7.3 • Cloud Computing Technologies
269

Figure 7.11 The components of a software-designed network (SDN) are broken into three layers: application, controller, and
infrastructure. Each layer has its function within the SDN structure. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license; credit "Routers": modification of work "Router (16624) - The Noun Project" by Christopher Pond/Wikimedia Commons, CC0
1.0)
Advances in virtualization have changed the realm of network storage. Virtualization has enabled network
storage to be expanded, meaning that cloud consumers can access more storage. It has also offered more
options for developing customized storage solutions for customers.
Today, there are cloud computing providers that specialize in storage only. They have taken the storage-area
network (SAN), which is a network that provides high-speed connectivity to a storage environment, and
introduced virtualization to it and expanded the storage capabilities (Figure 7.12). Changing the traditional SAN
into a virtualized environment creates a pool of virtual servers that can now be used as a cloud storage
environment. This virtualization of SAN has also changed the requirement for a large amount of physical
storage, thus changing the cost factor for both the cloud provider and the cloud consumer.
With every change comes challenges, such as the introduction of broadband networks, which provided cloud
providers with needed bandwidth but also created greater security concerns. Increasing throughput and
network capacity along with the increased bandwidth means an increase in the need for security tools for
cloud providers and their consumers. The cloud consumer expects to be able to trust that the cloud provider
has the necessary security tools in place to protect their data at the same time they provide availability to the
data.
Figure 7.12 The first component to virtualize a server is a physical server. The next is a virtualization interface tool to inventory the
resources of the physical server and allocate them into the virtual server environment. Once the tool is implemented, the virtual
server environment can be built out. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
270
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

LINK TO LEARNING
The use of virtualization tools in the cloud environment is a necessity—especially in the area of server
virtualization—as a way to increase the performance, availability, and reliability of a cloud service. Read this
article about the specific placement of the virtual machine in the cloud system (https://openstax.org/r/
109VirtMachPlc) to understand how researchers determined that placement can affect efficiency.
Migration Strategies and Best Practices
When an organization evaluates the possibility of migrating (moving) their systems, data, and infrastructure to
a cloud-based environment, they must determine their migration strategy, which is the plan an organization
will follow to move to the cloud. This migration must be laid out in a manner that upholds the organization’s
business strategies. Some best practices that an organization might consider for migration are the following:
1.
Identify the goals and objectives of the organization. This process will help the organization better
understand its need for a cloud-based environment and what advantage the environment will offer the
organization.
2.
Evaluate cloud providers to select the one that maximizes the business’s strategies. The evaluation process
is a step that will identify the advantages and disadvantages of each of the cloud providers considered for
the transition to the cloud.
3.
Design a plan for the migration. This process will require the involvement of the different departments in
the organization. The final plan should be assessed to ensure it adheres to IT governance.
4.
Implement a methodology for communication about the migration. This step is needed to create the
procedures for communicating the progress of the migration to the different departments in the
organization.
5.
Develop a test plan for the migration, and conduct a practice run. The migration process should have a
test environment in the plan to validate the data migration tool, which is a software-based tool that is
designed to move data from one data repository to another, and the ability to migrate into the cloud-
based environment. The practice run will prove or disprove the ability to migrate into the cloud.
6.
Conduct the migration. During this step, the migration process moves forward, and the systems are
moved to the cloud-based environment.
7.
Employ a specialist for the migration on the new platform. This aspect of the migration may be covered by
the cloud provider, or the organization migrating will have personnel to accomplish the process.
To select the migration tool to be used during the process, it is necessary to have chosen a cloud provider. Each
cloud provider will have migration tools specific to their systems and specialists trained in them. Part of the
practice run process will include testing the migration tools that the cloud provider uses, based on the amount
of data to be transferred, the type of data to be transferred, and network constraints.
Another point in the migration plan is the funding of the project. This funding will require management
support and the financial resources of the organization. In most migrations, the cloud provider offers an
estimate for the cost of the process. This is only an estimate because there are variables that may change
during the process. One such variable is the actual amount of data that are migrated because the volume will
change between the time the migration plan is developed and when the process starts.
One process that an organization should require is compliance with the CIA triad (refer to Figure 5.2). Security
in the migration process is a priority when selecting the cloud provider. There are many security standards that
should be followed in the handling of data, such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard, which are discussed in Chapter 6 Enterprise Security, Data
Privacy, and Risk Management. These security standards are dictated by international standards, federal
regulations, and even state statutes. Security processes should then be laid out with the cloud provider to
7.3 • Cloud Computing Technologies
271

determine what type of identity and access management, network security, and data encryption the cloud
consumer will require. This service will have to be accounted for in the estimate to fund the migration.
Cloud-Based Standards in Industry
When designing cloud-based solutions for an organization, the organization will need to research the cloud
providers, the services available, the service levels required, contractual obligations, and even arbitration
policies. After performing this due diligence, the organization will need to select and implement an
international, federal, or state standard for the design process. One standard is the NIST Cloud Computing
Reference Architecture, which is a federal standard that can provide direction for an organization in the
selection process, industry definitions, and components of a cloud architecture. The NIST document will be
informative and resourceful for an organization that is considering a cloud environment for the first time.
Some cloud providers have frameworks in place to help organizations migrate into their cloud environment.
The framework provides guidance, tools, and processes to migrate into the new platform, accounting for
operations, performance, security, and cost.
When reviewing industry standards for cloud-based computing, organizations will need to continuously
reference the different cloud service models, cloud deployment models, and cloud security standards that
each provider offers. One such model is Security as a Service (SECaaS), a cybersecurity service that a cloud
provider offers to protect cloud consumers. It can be implemented across community, public, private, and
hybrid cloud deployment models. Another model is Firewall as a Service (FWaaS), which is a cybersecurity
service that a cloud provider offers to protect the perimeter of a company’s network.
Figure 7.13 The three main parts of the cloud provider infrastructure are SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS. The SECaaS is a component of the
SaaS infrastructure. The DBaaS is a component of the PaaS infrastructure. The FWaaS is a component of the IaaS infrastructure.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
One decision that an organization needs to make is the security standards to follow. The NIST Cybersecurity
Framework, which, as you learned in 5.3 Information Security and Risk Management Strategies, is a federal
272
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

standard that works in any computing environment. The framework provides guidance in the following areas
(Figure 7.14):
•
identifying, determining what in the organization needs to be protected;
•
protecting, putting safeguards in place to build a structure for the protection of assets;
•
detecting, implementing tools needed to identify cybersecurity threats;
•
responding, implementing a strategy for the containment of any cybersecurity incidents; and
•
recovering, restoring any system to operational status after a cybersecurity occurrence.
Figure 7.14 Each component of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework has a specific function in the cybersecurity framework.
Organizations can create their own functions for each of the components. (credit: modification of work from Introduction to
Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
The NIST Cybersecurity Framework provides a foundation for an organization to develop a cybersecurity
program. It can be used in the development of policies for cybersecurity, risk management, business
continuity, and disaster recovery plans.
FUTURE TECHNOLOGY
Cybersecurity Issues in Artificial Intelligence Use in Cloud Computing
Consider the future of cybersecurity as it pertains to cloud computing and then add a tool like AI. The use of
AI in cybersecurity can greatly enhance the methodology used to identify potential threats to the cloud
environment. The full extent of the opportunities that AI can add to the tools cybersecurity specialists use is
unknown at this time, yet it can play a role in the defense of data. In fact, the Cybersecurity and
Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) has published its “Roadmap for Artificial Intelligence” to demonstrate
how the U.S. cyber defense agency believes they can use AI responsibly to enhance and protect critical
infrastructure.4 The future of cybersecurity involves AI, so it is important to learn how to use it responsibly
to protect and secure data. Reading about how CISA is using AI in cybersecurity can provide a foundation
for this knowledge.
Case Study: Migrating to the Cloud
A company wants to restructure its IT resources and has determined that the cloud meets its requirements. It
has compared the use of a cloud-based environment to the goals and objectives of the organization and
concluded that the cloud-based environment will offer a competitive advantage in the organization’s industry.
This restructuring will require the migration of the company’s systems to the cloud.
The organization will have project managers work with IT to develop a migration plan and submit it for
approval for those specializing in IT governance. The plan will require that IT provide resources to configure
4
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, “Artificial Intelligence,” U.S. Department of Homeland Security, accessed January
20, 2025, https://www.cisa.gov/ai
7.3 • Cloud Computing Technologies
273

the migration tool needed to move to this cloud provider’s environment. The plan is laid out as follows:
1.
Identify all assets to be migrated to the cloud.
2.
Identify all licensing associated with the software currently used.
3.
Meet with the cloud provider to determine which licensing will transfer or if licensing is provided in the
contract.
4.
Establish a test environment in the cloud.
5.
Decide on the migration tool to be used and develop the migration application.
6.
Test the migration tool in a practice run.
7.
Review the information from the practice run to determine if the migration will be successful.
8.
Establish a migration date and communicate it across the organization.
9.
Conduct the migration.
10.
Test and validate the migration.
11.
Conduct a follow-up to the migration and create a lessons-learned document.
This is a simple outline of a process an organization might follow to migrate to the cloud. Each migration is
different and has requirements that will vary depending on factors associated with the organization and the
cloud provider.
7.4 Cloud-Based Industry Applications
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the types and categories of applications in the cloud
•
Determine when an enterprise application would be migrated to the cloud
Cloud-based applications can vary based on the industry and the needs of an organization. Examples of
categories of applications include analytics, development, and e-commerce. One solution is a commercial off-
the-shelf application, which is commercially produced software or hardware that is available for sale and is
ready to install and use without customization. Another solution is a home-grown application, which is
software that is developed for an organization in-house, based on the development requirements of the
organization.
Types and Categories of Applications in the Cloud
Organizations are now challenged to look at their cost as it pertains to the different applications they use to
operate in the market space. These applications carry maintenance and licensure costs. Each application will
eventually need to be updated or replaced due to the software manufacturer’s requirements. Replacement of
the application is defined by the application itself and the number of seats allowed in the terms of the license.
Organizations are now turning to cloud-based applications to replace their current applications. These
applications are hosted in the cloud versus a physical on-premise environment. The application is leased based
on the same criteria, such as number of seats and volume of data, which are comparable to the purchase of
the application. The difference is that instead of owning the application outright, the organization leases the
privilege to use the application.
Companies like SAP, Oracle, and Workday offer cloud-based enterprise resource planning (ERP), which is a
system that is used to manage the operations of an organization for customers that want to combine multiple
organizational platforms into one. Figure 7.15 illustrates examples of platforms that can be combined into an
ERP. The platforms are modular and can be configured to incorporate financial, supply chain, analytics, and
other needs. The system gathers data and stores the data in a data warehouse where the data can be
managed. The combination of systems can handle the analytics that organizations use in the decision-making
process. Because the ERP system is customizable, the manufacturers build the systems according to each
274
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

customer’s requirements.
Figure 7.15 Enterprise resource planning (ERP) can include numerous possible components, as it is built to the customer’s
requirements. (credit: modification of work from Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)
Companies such as Salesforce, HubSpot, and Zoho have a cloud-based customer relationship management
(CRM) application, which organizations can use to manage customer interactions and leads, and perform
analytics. A CRM is used to determine the return on the organization’s sales force investments in the customer
base and uses a data warehouse for accumulating the data for analytics purposes. Figure 7.16 shows an
example of a CRM. A CRM is a modular platform and is fully customizable based on the customer’s
requirements.
Figure 7.16 There are several possible components of a customer relationship management system (CRM). Each CRM is designed
and implemented based on the customer requirements. The modules provide information for the system and the decision-making
process. (credit: modification of work from Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY 4.0 license)
7.4 • Cloud-Based Industry Applications
275

Companies such as Infor, Oracle, and SAP offer cloud-based supply chain management systems. A supply
chain management (SCM) system optimizes an organization's production and distribution of goods and
services. The SCM has upper-level components, such as logistics, management, and profit. Like other
solutions, these components are also customizable. For example, logistics will have functions such as
managing inbound and outbound logistics. Each SCM is designed based on customer requirements and
specifications. Figure 7.17 shows an example.
Figure 7.17 The primary levels of the CRM components are customizable to provide functionality, such as this example of a supply
chain management system. The CRM system is fully customizable; therefore, other components are available. (credit: modification of
work from Introduction to Computer Science. attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Companies such as Workday, BambooHR, and ADP offer cloud-based human resources (HR) systems. This type
of system can be used for employee relations, performance evaluations, payroll, and benefits. This system
operates a data warehouse that stores the data files for use in the analytics process. The components of the
HR system are customizable, such as the application programming interface or the choice of the database
system (such as Microsoft SQL or Oracle).
Each organization should evaluate their processes to determine which system meets the requirements of the
operation. These requirements vary from organization to organization, which is the justification for the
manufacturers constructing the systems in a modular layout. The organization will determine the functionality
of the system by providing the manufacturer with details of its operation, and the outputs of each section of
the organization, that need to be covered by the system.
The other aspect of these cloud-based systems is that one system covers all the functionalities of the others.
The ERP system has modules for HR, CRM, and SCM built into its operational parameters.
Migrating an Enterprise Application to the Cloud
When an application, such as Microsoft Office 2016, is no longer supported, organizations will need to
consider their next steps. These steps can be to replace the application with a different on-premise application
or migrate their system to the cloud (Figure 7.18). Office 2016 could be replaced with Office 365, which acts like
276
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

a cloud service with regular updates instead of an Office suite product that becomes obsolete. This decision
has many factors, such as the difference in cost between the on-premise product and the cloud-based service.
Other factors include licensing or system requirements. When the application is a mission-critical platform,
which is an application or program that will cause a financial burden if there is a loss of service, then
monitoring and management controls must be included in the migration process. A cloud computing platform
provides technical support and security in moving applications to the cloud. Cloud computing services also
offer the infrastructure, storage, and processing power to make a migration relatively easy.
Figure 7.18 An organization may want to consider several steps before they migrate their data to the cloud. The migration process
can be automated, yet the order, tools, and steps to be taken will need to be developed for the process. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
If an organization wants to use cloud-based application development, they must evaluate the tools that are
available in the automation and optimization of the migration process. These tools can help reduce the cost of
the migration process because of the reduced human interaction needed in the process. The automation
process will aid in the data migration process, provided there is minimal configuration of the tools, since
human interaction is required for configuration, which in turn drives the cost up. Each of the major cloud
providers, such as AWS, Google, IBM, and Microsoft, have migration tools that are specialized for the cloud-
based environment.
CAREERS IN IS
Automation in Data Migration
The use of automation tools in the migration of data requires personnel who are fluent in software
development and proficient in programming languages. The job titles might be Cloud Automation Engineer
or Senior Software Engineer. The person in this position will not only develop the tools, they will also need
an understanding of the different environments the automation tool will be used in. This means that the
professional in the position will need to be fluent in both the physical and virtual cloud-based
environments.
7.4 • Cloud-Based Industry Applications
277

GLOBAL CONNECTIONS
Software Development in Cloud Computing
Software development is not a local process anymore; it has moved to a global environment. Software
development projects are not just handled by one group in an organization. Projects are shared across
global organizations to expedite the turnaround and use personnel efficiently across the organization.
Since projects are shared across the global development environment, there are requirements, laws,
regulations, and standards that vary from country to country that have to be managed. This global
connection allows for a project to have access to additional capabilities, but it also increases the complexity.
Case Study: Using the Cloud for Parallel Application Development
Organizations are often faced with the decision about whether or not to automate. When an organization’s
applications have reached the end of their life cycle, a decision must be made about what next steps should be
taken. These decisions have both time constraints and funding needs associated with them. The organization
will need to prepare for the development of the application, as features will have changed, processes may
have changed, and the environment that IT operates in may have to change. This is the time in which the
organization should have project management develop the process for the development of the application.
Project management can help determine if the development of the application is considered a new project or
is associated with change management. No matter which direction the organization goes with for the
development of the application, the process will incorporate the software development life cycle (refer to
Figure 4.7). The organization will need to prepare for the new application by starting with the software
development life cycle (SDLC), which, as you have learned, is the process used for the development of software
and applications (refer to 4.1 Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development). This process can
include moving the application to a new computing environment, such as the cloud. Needing a new
application is an opportune time to develop in the cloud. This is also the time to determine if the application
will operate in a virtual environment.
The cloud environment offers an organization the opportunity to develop the new application in parallel with
the old application, thus providing the organization with the ability to identify differences between the two.
The parallel process offers the development team the chance to work with the end user to make a smooth
transition. The parallel process allows for testing of features, especially those that might be new, and the
ability for the end user to interact with the system and assist in verification of the processes.
7.5 Scientific, Industrial, and Social Implications of Cloud Computing
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain the scientific breakthroughs that made cloud computing possible
•
Identify the social implications of cloud computing and its impact on data privacy
•
Understand cloud-based sustainability
Cloud computing has made many advances since its inception. These advancements have been associated
with the introduction of new technology, SDNs, and the growth of the internet. Each advancement has led to
new opportunities in the cloud market space, which in turn has led to new offerings for cloud consumers and
moving cloud-based computing into the mainstream of business today. Consider a scenario of vacation
planning. In the past, people had to use travel agents to plan trips, but now there are many travel applications
that allow a person to plan their own vacation.
With the move to the cloud, data privacy has become a relevant and timely topic. Another concern is the
278
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

ethical use of data that reside in cloud environments. Further, consider the social impact of the amount of data
stored in the cloud, which is accessible at any time of day by any device.
The sustainability of any market space is a question all organizations need to consider. In the market space of
remote access, cloud-based computing is accessible to most people. It is available from any device without the
addition of an application, software, or tool. This is a benefit that adds to the sustainability of the cloud.
Scientific Breakthroughs That Made Cloud Computing Possible
One of the most important breakthroughs in cloud computing was SDNs, which have changed the way
network engineers manage traffic by offering scalability, which led to optimization of traffic performance
through the infrastructure layer’s ability to manage network resources, and the flexibility to design networking
in a new manner using the functionality of the control layer. In the cloud computing environment, SDNs
provide better management of network traffic, improve resource management, and give cloud providers tools
to enhance their security profile. What makes the SDN platform so unique is that it is built on open-source
software, free software that is available for use and modification without licensing, known as OpenFlow and
OpenDaylight. There are also SDN platforms using Python-based language for programming.
Research continues today into possible alternatives to the current open-source software used. There may be
alternatives because SDN architecture works with virtualization and bare metal platforms that are
independent of the network equipment manufacturer. This independence offers more capabilities, flexibility,
and security by not requiring a specific vendor for network equipment, which in turn allows for a layered
approach to building out the cloud provider’s network infrastructure. SDN architecture communicates across
the three layers: application, control, and infrastructure (refer to Figure 7.11). The communication is facilitated
by the API.
CAREERS IN IS
Software-Defined Network Cloud Architect
The state of network engineering has changed with the introduction of SDN. A position as an SDN Cloud
Architect requires an undergraduate degree and may also require certifications in programming languages,
cloud architecture, and virtualization. Changes in the network architecture require that the IT professional
performing the duties is qualified and certified. These positions work with both physical and virtual
environments, so the IT professional will need knowledge in physical equipment plus an understanding of
virtualization software and systems.
Social Implications of Cloud Computing and Its Impact on Data Privacy
The social implications related to data privacy and security also connect to the ethical guidelines of an
organization and the personal code of conduct of staff that access the data. In addition, it is important to
consider the legal implications, jurisdiction issues, and operational requirements, plus national laws, state
laws, and international standards, such as GDPR, System and Organization Controls, and California Consumer
Privacy Act, that might control certain types of cloud service operations. Cloud computing systems use data
marts, data warehouses, data lakes, and big data. A data mart is a data storage location that is a subset of a
data warehouse. A data warehouse is a data storage location that accumulates data from multiple sources. A
data lake is a repository used to store structured and unstructured data that are not size dependent. Big data
is a large data set that is used for analysis. The storage of data by the cloud provider and the use of data by the
cloud consumer must follow regulations and laws written for the protection and ethical use of the data. These
regulations and laws are often specific to the industry, such as medical, financial, and educational areas.
Social implications that impact individuals in society involve use of the stored data. An organization’s analysis
of the data for decision-making can have positive or negative effects on society. Opening a manufacturing
7.5 • Scientific, Industrial, and Social Implications of Cloud Computing
279

plant in an area that has a labor force can be considered a positive effect, whereas its impact on the natural
resources of the area might be a negative effect. This is where the organization has to determine the impact
their actions will have on society in that specific region.
The type of information that is to be produced from the data will dictate the type or tools that will be used to
extract it. The data from the different storage platforms can be used to discover trends, make predictions for
future growth in a product, and perform analytics to determine if the organization is growing as planned. The
manner in which the data is to be interpreted also influences the type of tool used to extract it. There are tools
that provide numerical information, visualization of the information, and general reporting. All of these factors
are taken into consideration when selecting the right tool for the decision-making process.
ETHICS IN IS
Data Storage
The storage of data raises ethical concerns for organizations. Data privacy is always in the forefront when
dealing with stored data because of the possibility of data breaches. The data that an organization stores
are a target for potential hackers. It is required that organizations implement strong encryption practices,
such as using algorithms like AES-256 and implementing end-to-end encryption for sensitive data, and
access controls, such as employing multi factor authentication for log-ons and conducting regular security
audits to identify vulnerabilities and ensure proper implementation of controls.
Information technology professionals must have a code of ethics when dealing with large amounts of data.
This code of ethics is needed not only to protect the privacy of the data but to protect the integrity of the IT
professional.
Cloud-Based Sustainability
In any industry, an organization must determine how to achieve sustainability in their products, services, and
offerings. This issue is familiar to those who developed cloud computing. One factor that has led to the
sustainability of cloud-based computing is its accessibility from any device. Creating a platform that does not
require the adding of an app, software, or a proprietary component is a major factor in attracting and
sustaining a strong customer base. It is also important to consider the environmental impact of cloud-based
solutions, such as energy consumption of data centers, and reflect on how an organization can reduce its
carbon footprint, such as learning what efforts are being made to recycle resources (for example, cooling
water, using generated heat, and optimizing operations). These factors can help an organization determine
what cloud-based solutions to use.
GLOBAL CONNECTIONS
Sustainability
Sustainability is a global commitment, whether it involves the environment or the continuation of a product
line. Each cloud provider has different definitions for sustainability and different interpretations of the
effects on the global market. An organization should review the cloud provider’s sustainability practices
when evaluating the provider. As the cloud grows, the actions of the cloud providers improve sustainability
in the form of growth and in the protection of the environment for the future. For example, Google
promotes sustainability by pursuing net-zero emissions through technology and innovation, such as
energy-efficient chips. Google Maps can provide traffic and emissions data that may help city planners
make decisions about development and transportation systems, in turn, potentially supporting initiatives to
make cities more environmentally friendly.
280
7 • Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure
Access for free at openstax.org

Another factor that can lead to sustainability is a provider’s ability to offer services that can be created with
automated tools by the customer, without needing to wait on hold for customer service, thus reducing the
need for customer service interaction and, in turn, reducing the cost for assistance. The minimal time it takes
for a cloud consumer to bring a system online, roll it into production, and start generating revenue is a major
component of satisfaction and will lead to sustainability.
Each offering, each tool, each process, and each component that cloud-based computing puts in place benefits
their sustainability. The potential for growth is sustainable, the possibility of continued offering is sustainable,
and the new technology that emerges has the potential for sustainability.
7.5 • Scientific, Industrial, and Social Implications of Cloud Computing
281

Key Terms
bare metal server
physical server that is deployed for a single business that provides the business full
access to the server resources
business continuity
plan that an organization puts in place to maintain its operational status in an
emergency scenario
capital expenditure
cost for the acquisition of assets
cloud computing
(also, the cloud) information technology resources that are available through the internet
on an on-demand or pay-as-you-go basis without the users needing to manage it
cloud consumer
entity that uses and maintains access to computing resources of a cloud provider
cloud provider
company that provides on-demand services such as data storage, applications, and
infrastructure in a platform accessible through the internet
commercial off-the-shelf
commercially produced software or hardware that is available for sale and ready
to install and use without customization
Communication as a Service (CaaS)
service that allows for the cloud-based delivery of services such as Voice
over Internet Protocol, videoconferencing, and internet-based telecommunication services
community cloud
infrastructure shared by multiple organizations with a common interest
customer relationship management (CRM)
application that organizations use to manage customer
interactions and lead management, and perform analytics
cybersecurity specialist
person who identifies and develops security strategies, verifies needed security
improvements, and implements security strategies for an organization
data migration tool
software-based tool that is designed to move data from one data repository to another
Database as a Service (DBaaS)
service that gives cloud consumers the ability to manage and maintain
relational and nonrelational databases
delivery model
resources offered by a cloud provider
deployment model
location, method, and entity responsible for controlling the infrastructure
disaster recovery
process an organization follows to reestablish operational status after an incident causes a
system failure
elastic storage
ability for a cloud storage resource to expand or collapse based on demand
end user
entity that makes use of the technology provided by an organization
Firewall as a Service (FWaaS)
cybersecurity service that a cloud provider offers to protect the perimeter of a
company’s network
home-grown application
software that is developed for an organization in-house, based on the
development requirements of the organization
hot site storage
cloud service in which mission-critical data are stored in one location where the
organization can have immediate access to the data
hybrid cloud
combination of public and private models that can be combined with on-premise infrastructure
infrastructure
facility and system used to support an organization’s operations
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
cloud services deployment model that involves delivery of infrastructure
resources, such as networking and storage
market share
sales a company has in its industry, usually calculated as a percentage
migration strategy
plan an organization will follow to move to the cloud
mission-critical platform
an application or program that will cause a financial burden if there is a loss of
service
network engineer
person with the skill to design, implement, and manage a network in support of an
organization’s mission
network-attached storage (NAS)
cloud service–provided storage system that is flexible and attaches to an
organization’s network infrastructure
NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture
federal standard that can provide direction for an
organization in the selection process, industry definitions, and components of a cloud architecture
282
7 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org

on-premise environment
physical hardware, such as servers, network equipment, workstations, and
network infrastructure
ongoing cost
expense for day-to-day operations
open-source software
free software that is available for use and modification without licensing
Platform as a Service (PaaS)
cloud services deployment model that involves management of the software
and hardware resources for the purpose of development
private cloud
infrastructure dedicated to a single organization
public cloud
infrastructure that provides services in an on-demand environment
request for proposal
documentation of the details of a project, including the information technology
resources that might be needed, in order to support the bidding process to get a fair price
request for quote
process for determining the pricing of information technology resources based on the
organization’s understanding of what is needed
return on investment (ROI)
metric that determines the value of an investment
scalability
ability of a resource to be scaled up or down with minimal effort
Security as a Service (SECaaS)
cybersecurity service that a cloud provider offers to protect cloud consumers
service-level agreement (SLA)
document that outlines levels of service that a cloud provider assures the
cloud consumer they will receive
Software as a Service (SaaS)
cloud services deployment model that involves delivery of applications in the
cloud
software-defined network (SDN)
network that uses software for traffic management in programmable
controllers and interfaces
storage-area network (SAN)
network that provides high-speed connectivity to a storage environment
supply chain management (SCM)
optimization of an organization's production and distribution of goods
and services
system administrator
person who manages and maintains the information technology and information
systems resources for an organization
Testing as a Service (TaaS)
service that cloud providers have built to outsource testing of software,
application, and other components that would normally be performed in the organization
total cost of ownership
investment in a product for the lifetime of the product
up-front cost
expense for services before delivery
virtualization
service in which a physical computer environment creates a simulated computer environment
Summary
7.1 Fundamentals of Cloud Computing
•
On-premise IS resources provide organizations with systems that are managed and maintained by the IS
staff of the organization.
•
Cloud computing has introduced a means by which organizations can provide services to their customers
through the internet.
•
Cloud computing provides constant access through the internet to any device from any location.
•
Cloud computing maximizes resource use through the implementation of virtualization software, which
adds scalability and elasticity for the cloud consumer.
•
There are numerous IS positions available in cloud computing, such as network engineers, system
administrators, and cybersecurity specialists.
7.2 Cloud Computing Services, Pricing, and Deployment Models
•
Cloud computing incorporates a delivery model to allow consumers to build the cloud computing
environment that will best handle their computing needs. Those delivery models are IaaS, PaaS, and SaaS.
•
Cloud computing has a deployment model that enables the cloud consumer to build an environment
7 • Summary
283

structure that meets business strategies. The deployment models are community, private, public, and
hybrid.
•
Cloud computing offers consumers flexibility, scalability, and pricing variations based on usage.
•
The cost factor of cloud computing versus on-premise environments should be evaluated before
organizations enter any contracts.
•
Each cloud provider is different, and the services they offer differ based on their customer profiles.
7.3 Cloud Computing Technologies
•
Technology used in cloud-based computing, such as SDNs, virtualization, and storage-area networks,
provides some of the functionalities offered to cloud consumers.
•
To properly migrate to cloud-based computing, organizations must determine what migration tools are
needed to complete the move to the cloud infrastructure.
•
Security of the data is essential when it comes to migrating to a cloud-based platform. Security
frameworks such as NIST and the CIA triad will help with the process before, during, and after.
•
Organizations need to identify a cybersecurity framework that maximizes the protection of their data.
7.4 Cloud-Based Industry Applications
•
Organizations need a variety of cloud computing applications and must choose the category and type to
be developed, purchased, or leased.
•
Organizations will encounter software or applications that the vendor stops supporting and will need to
determine whether to replace the software or migrate to the cloud.
•
Organizations can research the possibility of migrating to a cloud-based application versus on-premise
deployments.
•
In a migration strategy, organizations can determine if the application migration can be automated to
reduce costs.
7.5 Scientific, Industrial, and Social Implications of Cloud Computing
•
The evolution of technologies and software has moved cloud-based computing into the mainstream of
business.
•
Ethics must drive an organization’s use of data because of social implications and data privacy laws and
regulations.
•
Cloud-based computing will need to continue to look at new forms of revenue to accomplish sustainability.
Review Questions
1. What term describes a physical computing environment that is located at an organization’s facility?
a. on-premise
b. hot facility
c. cold site
d. cloud-based
2. A cloud environment incorporates physical hardware to deliver services that are described in what way?
a. programmable
b. virtualized
c. tested
d. rack mounted
3. What is the term for the party that manages and maintains a cloud-based environment?
a. service provider
b. ISP engineer
c. cloud provider
d. cloud engineer
284
7 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

4. What factor offers the cloud environment flexibility, utilization of system resources, scalability, and a cost
factor that is scalable?
a. cloud computing
b. physical environment
c. coding
d. virtualization
5. What is the term for a plan that an organization puts in place to maintain its operational status in an
emergency scenario?
a. business continuity
b. recovery plan
c. emergency recovery
d. shutdown plan
6. What is the first level of the cloud environment that must be designed based on the requirements of the
cloud consumer?
a. Infrastructure as a Service
b. Platform as a Service
c. Software as a Service
d. Database as a Service
7. What is the second level of the cloud environment that is to be built in relation to the Infrastructure as a
Service component?
a. Database as a Service
b. Software as a Service
c. Platform as a Service
d. Communication as a Service
8. What service allows cloud consumers the ability to manage and maintain relational and nonrelational
databases?
a. Infrastructure as a Service
b. Software as a Service
c. Testing as a Service
d. Database as a Service
9. What is the term for an environment that is owned by a specific community or cloud provider that is
offering services to a specific community?
a. hybrid cloud
b. community cloud
c. public cloud
d. private cloud
10. What is the term for an environment designed to use several deployment models?
a. community cloud
b. public cloud
c. private cloud
d. hybrid cloud
11. What advancement changed the way networking components worked, handled traffic, and opened new
methods of controlling the network architecture?
a. SDN
b. VPN
c. ACD
7 • Review Questions
285

d. ATM
12. Advances in what area have changed the realm of network storage?
a. networking
b. virtualization
c. programming
d. architecture
13. What would an organization use to move their content to a cloud provider?
a. programming code
b. command line
c. migration tool
d. solution plan
14. What type of legal document is the NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture?
a. state law
b. industry guideline
c. commercial code
d. federal standard
15. What is the name of the guidelines that provide a foundation for the organization to work from and
develop a cybersecurity program?
a. NIST Cybersecurity Framework
b. NIST Cloud Computing Reference Architecture
c. NIST Standard for Cybersecurity and Risk
d. NIST Computing Security Standard
16. What is a component of an enterprise resource planning system?
a. company goals and implementation plans
b. customer relationship management
c. mission-critical platform
d. home-grown application
17. What is an example of a cloud-based application used by companies such as Salesforce, HubSpot, and
Zoho for managing their customer interactions, lead management, and analytics?
a. enterprise management planning
b. customer relationship management
c. supply chain management
d. automatic call distribution
18. What is a component of a supply chain management system?
a. payroll
b. customer interactions
c. employee evaluations
d. logistics
19. What is the consideration for planning that involves needed resources, maintenance, licensing, and utility
cost?
a. funding amounts
b. quotation numbers
c. cost factors
d. loan values
20. What can aid in the data migration process when there is minimal need for human interaction?
286
7 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

a. machine learning
b. customized configuration
c. programming language
d. automation process
21. What platform is unique in that it is built on open-source software known as OpenFlow and OpenDaylight?
a. SDN
b. ATM
c. TCP/IP
d. VPN
22. What factor related to an IS professional who accesses data relates to the ethical guidelines of the
organization when discussing social implications, data privacy, and security?
a. job description
b. personal code of conduct
c. job requirements
d. manager’s approval
23. Cloud computing systems utilize data marts, data warehouses, data lakes, and big data storage
techniques for the accumulation of what?
a. control system data
b. database backups
c. raw data
d. management logs
24. What repository is used to store structured and unstructured data and is not size dependent?
a. big data
b. data mart
c. data warehouse
d. data lake
25. What component of cloud-based computing is influenced by its accessibility from any device?
a. competitiveness
b. drive
c. profitability
d. sustainability
Check Your Understanding Questions
1. In your own words, describe what cloud computing offers the cloud consumer.
2. What does virtualization offer the cloud environment?
3. What are three examples of specialized careers for individuals who work in cloud computing?
4. What factors need to be covered when an organization adds new information technology resources to the
cloud-based environment?
5. In your own words, describe Platform as a Service.
6. Identify and explain the purpose of each of the three primary delivery models offered in cloud-based
computing.
7. Identify and describe the use of the four deployment models used in cloud-based computing.
8. What are two courses of action an organization can take when acquiring new cloud-based environments?
7 • Check Your Understanding Questions
287

9. What are the primary delivery models for cloud-based computing?
10. In your own words, describe some advantages of using a software-defined network in a cloud-based
environment.
11. What are the components of the CIA triad?
12. What are some additional cloud service models that are available?
13. What are the components of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework?
14. Each application has a life cycle in which it must be updated or replaced due to the software
manufacturer’s requirements. What is the term for this life cycle?
15. List four of the modules of an enterprise resource planning system.
16. List four modules of a customer relationship management system.
17. List four modules of a supply chain management system.
18. Describe the parts of a cost factor that might be used to determine if migrating to the cloud is cost
effective.
19. How have software-defined networks (SDNs) changed the way network engineers manage traffic?
20. One factor that has led to the sustainability of cloud-based computing is accessibility. Describe
accessibility as it pertains to cloud-based computing.
21. Identify the different types of storage that an organization has access to in a cloud-based environment.
Application Questions
1. Consider the skills needed to become a systems administrator in cloud computing. On top of the
administration skills, what additional skills are needed?
2. When evaluating the possible uses of a hybrid cloud, identify one that a retail store might use.
3. What are the functions of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework and how are they applied?
4. If an organization’s application is deemed to be at the end of its life, what two production environments
can be considered for the new application?
5. What should an information technology professional develop to adhere to regulations and laws when
handling data?
288
7 • Application Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
