Figure 10.1 Robotics and their growing ability to process large volumes of data remain central to discussions on emerging
technologies. (credit: modification of work “Artificial Intelligence & AI & Machine Learning – 30212411048” by
https://www.vpnsrus.com/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
Chapter Outline
10.1 Defining Emerging Technologies
10.2 The Evolving Frontiers of Information Systems
10.3 Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in Information Systems
Introduction
Innovation can be defined as applying a new process or concept to an existing technology to add value,
enhance its capabilities, improve efficiency, or address unmet needs. Innovation is continually applied to
technology, resulting in emerging technologies that create opportunities, challenges, and risks. Ultimately,
these technologies can significantly impact individuals and organizations.
10.1 Defining Emerging Technologies
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Define emerging technology and provide examples
•
Identify real-world applications of emerging technologies
•
Identify the opportunities, challenges, and risks of emerging technologies
When you hear the phrase “emerging technology,” what comes to mind? Have you ever driven an electric car
or ridden in a self-driving car? What do you think are the factors that determine if a technology is emerging?
Would you consider the latest smartphone an emerging technology? Technically, the first commercial
smartphone was released three decades ago. If technology created over thirty years ago was emerging then,
is it still emerging technology today? What about Henry Ford’s historical introduction of the moving assembly
line? Both of these technologies were built on existing technologies, and both have been revised and advanced
over the years to their current forms—both are examples of the important influences of emerging
Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
10

technologies.
What Makes an Emerging Technology
Any software or hardware that enhances the user experience by obtaining or using information and data in
new and compelling ways can be considered an emerging technology. The term can be used to describe new
technologies or the continuing development of existing technologies. Emerging technology can be found in all
areas of our society, including education, information technology, nanotechnology, biotechnology, robotics,
and artificial intelligence. If we look back over the last century, there have been many technological
advancements: the automated teller machine, the hard disk drive, the magnetic stripe card, mobile telephony,
desktop computers, the computer mouse, and more. Each of these was considered an emerging technology at
the time and is now a familiar part of our lives.
The progressive nature of emerging technologies allows for companies that embrace them to gain a
competitive advantage and the potential for synergies with other technologies that have the same or similar
goals. The convergence of technologies has the potential to create efficiencies that may not have previously
existed. Consider the convergence of video, voice, and data, for example. All these technologies were new at
one time, and as their capabilities became apparent, opportunities became available to combine the
technologies for use in one product. Having video, voice, and data on the same network allows multiple forms
of communication that are not possible with separate infrastructures. Sending email or text messages to
others while having a video chat conversation on the same device used to be hard to imagine, but they are
now widely used together.
There are many other forms of technology that are considered to be emerging because of their rapid rate of
change. The branch of engineering and computer science called robotics involves the conception, design,
building, and operation of robots, creating intelligent machines that can assist humans with a variety of tasks.
Robotics is considered emerging because it is being used in new and exciting ways every day. For example,
many surgeries today are being performed laparoscopically with the assistance of robotic technology. Self-
driving and electric vehicles are increasing their presence on roads, making waves in the automotive industry.
The Internet of Things (IoT) has introduced biometric scanners and wearable devices that are changing the
way we communicate and interact with each other.
Blockchain is considered an emerging technology due to its ability to improve efficiencies and streamline
processes across many different industries. A blockchain is a shared, immutable ledger that facilitates the
process of recording transactions and tracking assets. Blockchains are used for secured, transaction-based
actions and information sharing within business networks. Blockchain uses cryptography, the process of
hiding or coding information so that only the intended recipient can read it. Cryptographic protocols provide
secure connections, enabling two parties to communicate with privacy and data integrity and provide
additional layers of security. We see examples of blockchain use through the emergence of digital currency,
such as cryptocurrency or bitcoin, one type of cryptocurrency. Cryptocurrency uses blockchain technology and
allows transactions over the internet with no Federal Reserve System or monetary backing. Blockchain ensures
that the cryptocurrency is successfully transferred from the sender to the recipient and arrives at its intended
location and that financial transactions occur properly.
In 1977, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) was created and charged with promoting broader energy policy,
promoting energy conservation, and finding alternative sources of energy. With these goals in mind, the DOE
has become one of the largest federal organizations to drive innovation in the areas of power plants, solar
panels, and renewable energies, all considered emerging technologies because they influence the way we
interact with sustainable resources.
Educational institutions have also provided the means for researchers to foster innovation and develop
technology by providing research labs and direct and indirect support, such as funding, research assistants,
and faculty with subject matter expertise in research area and statistics. Ivan Sutherland, a professor at
378
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

Harvard University, along with his student Bob Sproull, created the first virtual reality (VR) device in 1968
(Figure 10.2). Sutherland is also credited with the development of augmented reality (AR) that same year.
Figure 10.2 Known as the “Sword of Damocles,” Ivan Sutherland and his research team created this first head-mounted virtual reality
device in 1968. (credit: modification of work “Virtual Reality Headset Prototype” by “Pargon”/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Emerging technologies usually introduce novel approaches, concepts, or applications that may not have been
previously considered. They also show rapid advancement, developing and changing quickly, often due to an
organization’s financial investments and research efforts. Other characteristics of emerging technologies
include their prominent impact, volatility, complexity, and uncertainty. Additionally, emerging technologies
may be characterized by the type of technology used, the industry in which they are used, or the uniqueness of
their attributes.
Emerging technologies are also known for their disruptive or transformative potential. They can introduce
significant change and challenge traditional norms. For example, the introduction of self-checkout kiosks in
grocery stores has reduced the number of cashiers needed to assist customers with their purchases. Following
are some other cutting-edge emerging technologies that merit special attention for their transformative
potential:
•
Quantum computing harnesses quantum mechanics principles to perform complex calculations
exponentially faster than traditional computers. It shows promising breakthroughs in cryptography, drug
discovery, and financial modeling.
•
Edge computing brings data processing closer to where data are created, reducing latency and enabling
real-time applications like autonomous vehicles and smart manufacturing.
•
Green computing practices focus on environmentally sustainable computing through energy-efficient
hardware, smart power management, and eco-friendly data center design.
The integration of these technologies creates new possibilities. For instance, edge computing can reduce
energy consumption by processing data locally, while quantum computing could optimize power grids for
better energy distribution. Meanwhile, cross-platform integration allows these technologies to work together.
A self-driving car might use edge computing for immediate decisions, quantum algorithms for complex route
optimization, and green computing principles to maximize battery life.
If we look back over the last century, there have been many technological advancements: the automated teller
machine, the hard disk drive, the magnetic stripe card, mobile telephony, desktop computers, the computer
mouse, and more.
10.1 • Defining Emerging Technologies
379

Real-World Applications of Emerging Technologies
Real-world applications of emerging technologies are boundless, and you are likely familiar with many usages.
An augmented reality (AR) overlays digital information onto a user's environment in real time. Augmented
reality often involves the use of hardware such as headsets or smartphones to overlay digital information onto
physical environments. Slightly different, virtual reality (VR) is a computer-generated environment that
simulates reality and allows users to interact with three-dimensional environments. AR and VR technologies
are advancing (Figure 10.3), particularly in fields like education, health care, and entertainment. New
immersive experiences are being created with better hardware, more realistic simulations, and applications in
virtual collaboration.
Figure 10.3 (a) Augmented reality and (b) virtual reality create immersive experiences that are being used across organizations and
fields to help teach and train employees. (credit a: modification of work “Command Center Alpha” by Dale Eckroth, U.S. Air Force/Air
Education and Training Command, Public Domain; credit b: modification of work “Razer OSVR Open-Source Virtual Reality for Gaming
(16241057474)” by Maurizio Pesce/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)
The biggest technological change over the last three decades has been the introduction of cell phones and
smartphones, which are almost as powerful as desktop computers. In response to consumer feedback,
smartphone manufacturers continue to develop and create more powerful devices with new features,
improving screen size, data storage, battery life, camara quality, and processing power.
Another emerging technology, AI, is the branch of computer science focused on creating intelligent machines
capable of performing tasks that typically require human intelligence, such as visual perception, speech
recognition, decision-making, and language translation. While AI was originally developed in the 1950s, the
power of modern computers provides new uses for AI. Artificial intelligence applications are transforming
everyday business operations across industries:
•
In retail, AI powers recommendation systems that suggest products based on past purchases and
browsing history.
•
In health care, AI assists radiologists by flagging potential abnormalities in medical images for review.
•
Manufacturing plants use AI for predictive maintenance, analyzing sensor data to identify when machines
might fail before they break down.
•
Financial institutions employ AI to detect fraudulent transactions by spotting unusual patterns in real time.
These practical applications are examples of how AI moves beyond theory to solve real business problems. AI
is not just about complex algorithms; AI is using technology to make processes more efficient, decisions more
informed, and services more personalized.
LINK TO LEARNING
While AI offers many opportunities for technological advancements, it also creates challenges. For example,
380
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

this documentary explores how bias is an issue in AI facial recognition (https://openstax.org/r/
109FacRecogBias) and how some aspects of AI may violate civil liberties.
A type of AI called generative AI creates new content or ideas in the form of text, images, videos, music,
audio, and other forms of data, and its supporting tools are being used to create mounds of content for
different professions. Educators, students, lawyers, project managers, and even publishers are using
generative AI to shorten the time on tasks. The information gathering that can be done from internet sources
and web applications can be pulled together quickly through generative AI.
ETHICS IN IS
Trust Issues in Artificial Intelligence Cause Ethical Concerns
Generative AI, such as ChatGPT, will change the way we approach learning and all forms of technology.
Generative AI has the ability to facilitate our learning, help with industry research, and diagnose many
different problems. But, there is one major flaw—it cannot be trusted all of the time. When gathering
information—such as images, audio, and text—from the internet, generative AI tools often use copyrighted
material, often without obtaining permission from the intellectual property owners. While generative AI
software can do a phenomenal job creating text and images, it lacks this ethical component.
Additionally, if AI is unable to find the information you request in your prompt, it may create that
information itself, which can result in fake articles, photographs, events, and people. For example, following
hurricanes on the East Coast during fall 2024, several fake AI-generated images were used to highlight how
the hurricane affected the area.1 In 2023, The Guardian determined that ChatGPT listed fake, unpublished
journal articles as responses to prompts asked for through the ChatGPT interface.2 ChatGPT may fabricate
content that mimics real articles if prompted, highlighting generative AI’s inability to verify factual accuracy.
This is a real problem in a virtual world. If generative AI software fabricates information, how can
individuals identify real information from fake information? The material generated by AI looks and reads
just like real articles. This only diminishes the trust of what is found on the internet. Without any type of
regulation, fake information can be referenced and even cited on the internet, leading to more
misinformation and potentially disinformation.
1
“Fake Images Generated by AI Are Spreading on Social Media, Compounding Misinformation Surrounding Hurricane Recovery
Efforts,” ABC News, October 15, 2024, https://abcnews.go.com/US/video/fake-images-generated-ai-spreading-social-media-
compounding-114824660
2
Chris Moran, “ChatGPT Is Making Up Fake Guardian Articles: Here’s How We’re Responding,” The Guardian, April 6, 2023,
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2023/apr/06/ai-chatgpt-guardian-technology-risks-fake-article
10.1 • Defining Emerging Technologies
381

Quantum computing represents another real-world application of emerging technologies. Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute in Troy, New York, became the first university to house an IBM quantum computer,
costing the school more than $150 million in investment capital.3 This acquisition allows students at the
college to propose research projects, and if the project has merit, time will be allotted for the project to run on
the quantum computer, providing students with an opportunity to gain hands-on experience in quantum
computing. In quantum computing computers use quantum mechanics principles to perform complex
calculations exponentially faster than traditional computers. With this ability, the computer models problems
and simulations that are extremely hard for researchers to conceptualize, such as complex weather
forecasting, large-scale financial modeling, and advanced pharmaceutical formulas for new drugs. These and
other complex problems tend to involve multiple variables that have elaborate interactions, requiring
sophisticated technology to analyze and understand the problems and potential solutions. Quantum
computing can provide the sophistication needed. However, the most significant challenge in quantum
computing is considered to be quantum error correction; effectively managing the noise and errors that occur
within quantum systems, which is crucial for achieving reliable and large-scale quantum computations.
Opportunities, Challenges, and Risks of Emerging Technologies
Emerging technologies offer a multitude of opportunities to enhance our lives in every way. For example,
businesses can use AI to generate valuable data about customer experiences and satisfaction, and these data
can be the impetus to make changes needed to improve customer service. Artificial intelligence can help
students learn by providing educational materials like customized flash cards and quizzes. At the same time,
the use of emerging technologies can pose challenges and risks that must be managed in balance with the
benefits that these technologies offer.
Opportunities
Emerging technologies provide boundless opportunities for businesses to evolve and increase their
competitive advantage. For example, enterprise modeling and integration (EMI), a process that uses
computer-based tools to model the business structure and facilitate the connection of its technology, work,
and information flow across an organization, has increasingly been considered a value-add for businesses as it
allows a quicker response to business challenges, and improves efficiencies. EMI connects functionality and
communication between information systems to include applications, data, clouds, application programming
interfaces, processes, and devices. It combines multiple integration approaches into one combined effort, with
one governance model. Incorporating AI into this process would be a value-add for businesses as its
capabilities can be integrated directly into products and systems to enhance performance in all system areas.
Augmented reality and VR also provide opportunities for business growth and improved performance. AR and
VR technologies allow users to access animated three-dimensional experiences, videos, and targeted detection
directly from their personal devices, leveraging components within the device such as the camera,
magnetometer, orientation, and other functions. An example of this functionality is the use of AR-enabled
applications to enhance user shopping experiences (Figure 10.4).
3
“Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Plans to Deploy First IBM Quantum System One on a University Campus,” IBM, June 28, 2023,
https://newsroom.ibm.com/2023-06-28-Rensselaer-Polytechnic-Institute-Plans-to-Deploy-First-IBM-Quantum-System-One-on-a-
University-Campus
382
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

Figure 10.4 Augmented reality is used with many online retailers to help shoppers visualize how that item would fit in their
environment. We are now able to see how a couch fits in our living room or how a dress looks on our body prior to purchase. (credit:
modification of work “Augmented reality fashion” by “sndrv”/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Additionally, emerging technologies continue to influence areas such as information technology, integrated
manufacturing, medical informatics, digital libraries, and electronic commerce, supporting efficiencies in
manufacturing, health care, e-commerce, and other facets of business. Another area impacted by emerging
technologies is information economics, which is a branch of microeconomics that analyzes how economic
decisions and consumer behaviors are influenced by knowledge and power. It focuses on how information is
produced, distributed, and used in economic systems. It is an important field of study to provide businesses
and other organizations with the data and knowledge they need to be competitive in the marketplace.
Another example is Bitcoin, which provides specific opportunities with its functionality, including the following:
•
Data sharing between businesses is enabled in a decentralized structure where no single entity is
exclusively in charge.
•
Security and privacy are improved wherein transactions have end-to-end encryption protections from
unauthorized activity.
•
Costs are reduced as a result of efficiencies in transaction and business processes.
•
Speed is increased as compared to manual processes and other technologies with similar functions.
Blockchain technology continues to evolve, finding new applications in areas like decentralized finance, supply
chain management, and secure data sharing. Blockchain technologies have touted benefits and opportunities
in several industries including financial institutions, health-care organizations, and nonprofit and government
agencies. Customers of these industries have experienced faster and less costly clearing and settlement of
financial transactions, increased security of patient privacy, and transparent supply chains to maximize social
impact. Specific to health-care organizations, patient- and organizational-related benefits can be attributed to
the use of blockchain technologies (Figure 10.5).
10.1 • Defining Emerging Technologies
383

Figure 10.5 Health care’s use of blockchain technology has benefits for both the health-care organization and patients. (credit:
modification of work “Fig. 3. Benefits of blockchain technology” by Israa Abu-elezz, Asma Hassan, Anjanarani Nazeemudeen, Mowafa
Househ, Alaa Abd-alrazaq/International Journal of Medical Informatics, Volume 142, October 2020, 104246. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ijmedinf.2020.104246, CC BY 4.0)
Challenges and Risks
The opportunities derived from emerging technologies are indeed exciting; however, with their expected
growth and expansion come challenges and associated risks. Security and data privacy will continue to be
ongoing concerns as cybercriminals are increasingly sophisticated at usurping the security protocols of
networked and cloud-based systems. Broader access to AI tools has equipped adversaries with the means to
exploit these technologies, generating misleading or incorrect information. For example, in fall 2023, fake
videos generated by AI featured Taylor Swift promoting Le Creuset cookware and Tom Hanks promoting a
dental plan. Both celebrities decried the videos as fake content produced without their input or permission.4
Artificial intelligence can be used to analyze patterns and detect vulnerabilities faster than security teams can
respond as the impact may be increasingly widespread as more of our services become reliant on AI. Users
can be tricked into responding to impostor prompts asking for identifying information. These challenges
continue to risk the security and data privacy protections needed to protect the personal information of users
and customers.
There are also security and data privacy concerns with the use of AR and VR. Unauthenticated data content is
sometimes used by AR browsers that facilitate the augmentation process; therefore, people can be misled by
false information provided on these sites. Aside from the cybersecurity challenges, the biggest VR danger is its
ability to interfere with one’s visual and auditory connection to the outside world. When users are immersed in
VR, they may experience a sensory conflict between what their bodies are experiencing in the real world and
the visuals of the virtual world. This can lead to cybersickness, which may include disorientation, dizziness, and
even nausea as users lose spatial awareness. It is crucial to maintain awareness of one’s surroundings when
immersed in these environments.5
Early implementations of blockchain technology have exposed some of the technology’s challenges and risks,
including ongoing threats to security and data privacy of its users. Additional challenges include the scalability
and performance, interoperability, regulatory and legal concerns, and adoption and integration of blockchain
technology. Energy consumption is also a significant challenge as blockchain technology requires high-
powered computing equipment to create new blocks and verify transactions. The energy needs to power this
4
Megan Cerullo, “AI-Generated Ads Using Taylor Swift’s Likeness Dupe Fans with Fake Le Creuset Giveaway,” ed. Anne Marie Lee,
CBS News, updated January 16, 2024, https://www.cbsnews.com/news/taylor-swift-le-creuset-ai-generated-ads/
5
Ann Pietrangelo, “All About Cybersickness,” Healthline, February 4, 2021, https://www.healthline.com/health/cybersickness
384
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

equipment are so great that blockchain technology’s energy consumption is causing substantial greenhouse
gas emissions and contributing to climate change.
10.2 The Evolving Frontiers of Information Systems
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Discuss the frontiers of information systems
•
Explain the convergence of information systems frontiers and emerging technologies
•
Explain the opportunities and challenges related to information systems frontiers
Information systems are constantly evolving as communities of researchers, developers, think tanks, and
others have expanded their thinking beyond what many of us can imagine in terms of where information
systems may take us next. We have seen the evolution of systems from concept through iterations of change
as the technology supporting these systems has evolved. Just look back on the evolution of the Apple iPhone,
first introduced in 2007. From its initial functionalities that included mobile phone calling, personal computing,
music, and a camera to its more contemporary features such as extended battery life, assistive touch, AI
features, and camera resolution, iPhone functionality continues to be developed and enhanced with each new
release. What do you think the next step is for the iPhone? How will the future versions of these types of
technologies continue to impact our lives?
The Frontiers of Information Systems
The concept of information systems frontiers refers to the latest developments in the field of information
systems. Frontiers explore new research areas, innovative applications, and emerging technologies that have
the potential to significantly impact the field. These frontiers encompass a wide range of topics including data
analytics, AI, cybersecurity, cloud computing, mobile computing, and social media.
Data Analytics
Data analytics has been identified as the future of information systems and innovation. In response to the
increasing number of systems available and the breadth of data collected, organizations are increasingly
looking to utilize this information. Walmart, for example, collects substantial amounts of data from their
website (such as purchase histories, and products sold and returned) and in store (like customer
demographics, store details, and products sold and returned). These data inform many of their business
practices.
Data analytics, as you learned in Chapter 8 Data Analytics and Modeling, is the process of examining datasets
to draw conclusions and insights, typically using statistical and computational methods to inform decision-
making or solve problems (Figure 10.6). The insights generated from data analytics help businesses with the
foundational information needed to increase performance and operational efficiencies. Along with better
decision-making and operational efficiencies, data analytics can lead to the simplification of data, increasing
the organization’s ability to make sense of the raw data collected and share that data as needed. Refer to 8.3
Analytics to Improve Decision-Making for data analytics tools and techniques that are used to process and
examine data, allowing insight into business challenges and future trends, and leading to more informed
business decisions.
10.2 • The Evolving Frontiers of Information Systems
385

Figure 10.6 Data analytics uses data visualization to gain a better understanding of the habits of customers, leading to more
informed decisions in business offerings and strategies. For example, Walmart might study purchase data to adjust its marketing
strategy. (credit: modification of work “Examining Fisheries Data” by NOAA’s National Ocean Service/Flickr, Public Domain)
CAREERS IN IS
Tech Market Researcher
Tech market research is becoming increasingly popular as organizations attempt to gauge how well
technology-related products are being received. Tech market researchers study market trends, consumer
behaviors, emerging technologies, competitor information, and other factors to determine the viability of a
new technological product or service. It is a systematic process of gathering, analyzing, and interpreting
data related to the technology sector. Specific roles in this area may include analyst, specialist, recruiter, and
general researcher, with general focus in wide-ranging areas of technologies to include data cloud
computing, big data management, and emerging technologies.
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial intelligence is an important innovation in information systems. Artificial intelligence is increasingly
being used in many industries, including health care, logistics, manufacturing, automotive, and publishing, as
well as in daily lifestyle applications. Artificial intelligence–enabled computer systems are able to process large
amounts of data, identify patterns and trends, and make decisions, tasks that generally require human
intelligence and a great deal of time and resources. Artificial intelligence uses reasoning, learning, problem-
solving, and perception as it processes the data.
It is important to recognize that to function optimally, AI must be grounded in data that are valid and reliable.
Without robust data, AI may produce inaccurate data analyses and biased algorithms. In addition, since AI
doesn’t have the reasoning capabilities of humans, the technology is poorly suited for situations that require
adaptation to change, such as using AI to operate machinery safely.
Artificial intelligence has several subfields that focus on its different aspects
•
The field of machine learning involves the creation of algorithms and models that enable machines to
learn from or make decisions about the data without specific programming.
•
A neural network is a method of AI that uses algorithms to teach computers to process data much like the
human brain, using image and speech recognition.
•
Deep learning uses multiple layers of neural networks to address deeper, more complex decision-making
and is often considered a subset of machine learning.
•
Cognitive computing simulates human thought processes via reasoning and learning.
•
Computer vision teaches machines how to see and interpret information from images or videos using
facial recognition, object identification, and segmentation.
•
The field of natural language processing teaches machines to understand and generate human
language and involves tasks such as speech recognition, text analysis, and language translation.
386
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

Cybersecurity
Cybersecurity is the practice of protecting internet-connected systems from internal and external threats of
unauthorized access, attack, or damage to its technologies and networks. It combines the people, processes,
policies, systems, and technology needed to thwart cyber risks, safeguard assets, and protect assets.
Cybersecurity has become increasingly vital to business as the breadth of today’s information is managed
electronically. The exposure caused by a breach can compromise personal information, leading to a loss of
trust and potential financial liabilities. Additionally, cybersecurity allows organizations to remain compliant
with regulations, safeguard against identity theft, and protect intellectual property, finances, and people’s
personal information.
Currently, cybersecurity is a critical aspect of information systems, and this will continue to be true as new
technologies emerge. The work of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) will continue to
be important for emerging technologies. The NIST-developed Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) leads as an
essential approach for organizations to create and manage their cybersecurity strategy. Refer to Chapter 5
Information Systems Security Risk Management and Chapter 6 Enterprise Security, Data Privacy, and Risk
Management for more on information on cybersecurity.
As new technologies emerge, there remain several pivotal layers of cybersecurity necessary to guard against
ever-evolving cyber threats:
•
Application security is a principal component of cybersecurity, adding security inside an application to
shield it from attacks on vulnerabilities within its code. Various tools (such as firewalls, antivirus software,
encryption techniques, and web application firewalls) combined with various types of application security
(authentication, authorization, encryption, logging, and application security testing) assist in keeping
applications secure.
•
Companies must protect customer, client, employee, and user information from unapproved access, use,
modification, loss or deletion. This component is dedicated to protecting the integrity of the data residing
within a system.
•
Network security protects the network from unapproved access and potential dangers. Firewalls and
antivirus software are examples of strategies used to support network security efforts.
•
Disaster recovery planning helps businesses identify the necessary and mission-critical applications vital to
maintain the operations of the organization and how the implementation of these plans will occur in the
event of a cyberattack.
•
Operational security encourages management to step inside the role of a hacker to identify areas of
vulnerability within the organization.
•
End-user security targets the safeguards of individual devices connected to a network, such as computers,
tablets, printers, and smartphones. Coupled with end-user education and training, these controls help to
alleviate security threats that may be caused by human error.
Biometrics are increasingly used to authenticate a person’s identity, such as fingerprints to access
smartphones, or the use of facial recognition technology at airport smart-gates. Some examples of biometrics
that could be used in 5G network security include fingerprint scanning, iris recognition, and voice recognition.
Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is an emerging technology defined as the use of hosted services like data storage, servers,
databases, networking, and software that run over the internet (or an intranet) rather than on private servers
and hard drives. Cloud computing services are available via public, private, or hybrid means and are generally
owned by a third party, allowing the customer to pay for the choice of how they want their infrastructure to be
managed and supported. Review Chapter 7 Cloud Computing and Managing the Cloud Infrastructure for more
information on cloud computing.
10.2 • The Evolving Frontiers of Information Systems
387

CAREERS IN IS
Cloud Engineering
Cloud engineers are increasingly needed to support the design, development, maintenance, security, and
management of cloud infrastructures. Cloud engineers ensure the security of the network. Additionally,
they assist with the planning and design of cloud computing applications and services for the business,
deployment of cloud-based infrastructure, and programming code in various languages such as Java,
Python, and C++. They also work with organizations on disaster planning, preparedness, and recovery.
Experience working with coding languages, as a systems administrator or network engineer and excellent
written and communication skills are necessary to succeed in this position.
Mobile Computing
The emerging technology of mobile computing involves the strategies, technologies, products and services
that enable users to access information without restricting the user to a single geographic location. Combined,
mobile computing technologies support the use of mobile devices that are portable, and wireless devices that
are enabled to transmit data, voice, and video communications. The convenience of mobile computing allows
people to access network services anywhere and anytime. Most could not have imagined a few decades ago a
future where you could call or text a relative in another country from an underground subway train or connect
with a long-lost classmate through a social media application.
Mobile computing combines infrastructure (technical pieces that enable communication such as a wireless
network), hardware (physical devices such as laptops), and software (applications and operating systems)
technologies. Characteristics of mobile computing technologies include portability, connectivity, social
interactivity, context sensitivity, and individualization. These are all applicable to the types of mobile devices
consumers enjoy using, such as tablets, mobile phones, and laptop computers.
In addition to being able to privately connect, interact, and collaborate with people through different
applications, there are several other advantages to mobile computing. For example, studies have shown that
mobile computing increases productivity. With the move toward working remotely, organizations have realized
that the cost of an office location may not make sense when employees can work from any location and be just
as productive.6 Mobile computing has also enabled a plethora of entertainment options with applications that
provide movies (like Netflix and YouTube), games (such as Wordle), lifestyle content (for example, HGTV and
Amazon), and more. Additionally, mobile computing now supports and connects to the cloud and cloud
computing services, allowing data such as photos, videos, and documents to be secured for future retrieval.
Mobile computing does have limitations. For example, the range and bandwidth (the capacity at which a
network can transmit data) of some devices is limited, leading to transmission interference or unwanted
disruptions while communicating. This can severely interrupt the quality of the sound or picture being
displayed on the device. Security standards that govern mobile computing technologies also remain an issue
as the industry regulations can lag behind the rate of innovation. Additionally, mobile computing technologies
present power consumption and battery charging challenges. For example, batteries can be negatively
impacted by temperature changes, making it difficult to recharge and maintain battery performance.
The Convergence of Information Systems Frontiers and Emerging
Technologies
In the context of computing and technology, convergence is the joining of two or more different entities in a
single device or system. The convergence of emerging technologies and IS frontiers can create new
6
Jane Thier, “Bosses, You’re Wrong: Remote Workers Are More Productive than Your In-Office Employees,” Fortune, October 20,
2022, https://fortune.com/2022/10/20/remote-hybrid-workers-are-more-productive-slack-future-forum/
388
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

opportunities for innovation and growth as the research and development processes in new frontiers helps
foster and promote emerging technologies to develop and evolve. For example, the convergence of AI and
data analytics can help organizations make better decisions by analyzing vast amounts of data in real time. It
can enable organizations to gain a competitive edge, optimize operations, and drive business value by
providing insights into data that a data analyst may not be able to uncover. Data analysts will still be needed to
interpret the data in a business sense as these technologies do not yet have the capacity to accomplish such
tasks.
The IoT can connect devices and sensors to create smart systems that can optimize operations and enhance
user experiences. These technologies can be leveraged to create smart homes, where internet-enabled
appliances and devices can be managed remotely via a connected network. For example, IoT smart devices
can support the needs of people who are hard of hearing or deaf by providing real-time alerts, such as a
smoke detector that activates non-sound-based alarms. Overall, the intersection of emerging technologies
and IS frontiers is an exciting area that has the potential to transform various industries and improve people’s
lives.
Opportunities, Challenges, and Risks of Information Systems Frontiers
The rapidly evolving field of information systems presents both significant opportunities and complex
challenges for organizations navigating the digital landscape. Frontiers of information systems, such as data
analytics, AI, cloud computing, mobile computing, and social media, provide opportunities, challenges, and
even risks to people and organizations as they continue to evolve.
Opportunities
Businesses can expect IS frontiers to expand and grow, becoming more advanced and mature in their
functions. For example, natural language processing enhancements will further the abilities of machines to
understand and generate human language, making it easier for users to interact with information systems.
This expected growth may provide increased employment opportunities to develop and manage such systems,
as well as a growth in educational and training opportunities in these areas.
Another opportunity afforded by these systems will be an overall improvement in networking infrastructure,
allowing increased compatibility between networked systems. Problems with voice, data, and image
transmission will be reduced, improving overall communication quality and delivery. This will also lead to a
reduction in hardware and software costs, reducing the overall costs of processing data. Over time, the cost
savings should make information systems more affordable, allowing businesses to become more competitive.
We have already seen exponential growth in mobile computing in the variations of devices, their functionality,
and their processing power. Mobile computing will continue to exhibit improved functioning, making it easier
to use and maintain, and possibly become more affordable in the future.
Challenges and Risks
Data analytics will experience challenges with big data (large amounts of complex data) in that it is unable to
be stored, processed, or analyzed in traditional data storage formats—a significant challenge. However,
analyzing this data in a timely manner can help decrease risks to society, nature, or the ecosystem. For
example, hospitals, pharmaceutical companies, and other medical and health organizations store large
amounts of medical data. When completed in a timely manner, data analytics can provide trend analysis and
identify potential health-related threats to different communities, improving and even saving lives. Another
risk occurs when, even if data are analyzed in a timely manner, the analysis uses bad data, such as those
caused by outdated records, inaccurate data integration processes, and data entry errors.
10.2 • The Evolving Frontiers of Information Systems
389

Data breaches are an increasing concern as hackers are becoming more sophisticated in breaking through
networks. In health care, which shows much promise in the convergence of IS frontiers and emerging
technologies, 45.9 million U.S. health-care records were breached in 2021, 51.9 million breaches occurred in
2022, and this increased to 133 million records exposed, stolen, or otherwise impermissibly disclosed in 2023.7
Care needs to be taken to protect data as it is processed in new ways.
Businesses are also challenged to maintain regulatory compliance as the increased use of these technologies
continues to push the boundaries of regulatory bodies. It is becoming more difficult and expensive to ensure
adherence to these regulations, and violations may result in substantial penalties, data breaches, and
reputational risk to the business.
Challenges and risks for cloud computing include misconfiguration of security settings, a common
vulnerability that occurs when security settings such as default configurations, improper access controls,
insufficient firewall protections, and other misconfigurations result in security issues. The data itself may pose
quality issues where duplicate data, corrupt data due to human error, or mixed data types may exist, all
creating challenges when gathering data for analysis.
LINK TO LEARNING
The publication Information Systems Frontiers: A Journal of Research and Innovation (https://openstax.org/
r/109ISFrontiers) explores topics in areas of emerging technologies, including research developments in
EMI, medical informatics, mobile computing, and e-commerce.
10.3 Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in
Information Systems
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Identify the societal and global impact of emerging technologies
•
Describe the global reach of research and innovation
•
Examine how research and innovation lead to emerging technologies
•
Discuss questions in emerging technologies
Emerging technologies are changing how information systems–related work and projects are managed.
Virtual assistants and chatbots, machine learning, predictive analyses, resource optimization, natural language
processing, data management, and other functionalities of emerging technologies help to automate repetitive
and routine tasks, enhance collaboration with team members and stakeholders, and efficiently plan and track
project tasks.8 Societal innovation can also have a major impact on social groups, resulting in a change in
behavior or practice that has far-reaching consequences worldwide. In an era defined by rapid technological
advancement, the emergence of innovative technologies has revolutionized societal interactions.
7
Steve Alder, “Healthcare Data Breach Statistics,” The HIPAA Journal, January 15, 2025, https://www.hipaajournal.com/healthcare-
data-breach-statistics/
8
Ana María Choquehuanca-Sánchez, Keiko Donna Kuzimoto-Saldaña, Jhonatan Rubén Muñoz-Huanca, et al., “Emerging
Technologies in Information Systems Project Management,” EAI Endorsed Transactions on Scalable Information Systems 11, no. 4
(2024), https://doi.org/10.4108/eetsis.4632
390
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

Societal and Global Impact of Emerging Technologies
The societal and global impact of emerging technologies refers to their worldwide effect of change—to
economy, culture, public policy, public services, health, the environment, and quality of life. For example,
emerging technologies are rapidly changing many aspects of the finance industry. When customers contact
their financial institutions with general banking questions, such as location, hours, account balance, and bill
payments, they can interact with AI-enabled systems to get the information they need and accomplish banking
tasks. Other uses include fraud detection, anti-money-laundering, risk management, credit scoring, and trade
and investment services (Figure 10.7). By automating routine tasks, organizational resources (human and
financial) can be allocated elsewhere, improving efficiency. As noted during a 2023 panel discussion at the JP
Morgan NBFI Leaders Forum in Sydney, Australia, generative AI could add $2.4 to $4.4 trillion annually to the
global economy.9 It is expected to impact 75 percent of areas, such as customer operations, marketing,
software engineering, and research and development, while reducing fraud and account rejection rates by 15
to 20 percent.10 We can also look at these services, enabled by AI and other emerging technologies, as
contributors to the closure of over 3,000 branches of large financial institutions in 2023 due to the rise of
digital banking.11
Figure 10.7 The financial sector utilizes artificial intelligence to support many areas of its business. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Another emerging technology with a societal impact is self checkout (SCO), in which machines are enabled
with artificial intelligence technology, product images, barcodes, and other mechanisms for customers to
complete purchases. First introduced in the 1980s, SCO technology began appearing in stores in greater
numbers in the 1990s. The SCO systems market generated $3.5 billion in revenue in 2021 and is expected to
grow 13 percent between 2022 and 2028 (Figure 10.8).12
9
Michael Chui, Roger Roberts, Lareina Yee, et al., The Economic Potential of Generative AI: The Next Productivity Frontier,
(McKinsey & Company, June 14, 2023), https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/mckinsey-digital/our-insights/the-economic-potential-
of-generative-ai-the-next-productivity-frontier#introduction
10
“How AI Will Make Payments More Efficient and Reduce Fraud,” J.P.Morgan, November 20, 2023. https://www.jpmorgan.com/
insights/payments/payments-optimization/ai-payments-efficiency-fraud-reduction
11
Courtney Rau and Konner McIntire, “Fact Check Team: Major Banks Close Their Doors amid Rise in Digital Banking,” The National
News Desk, November 28, 2023, https://thenationaldesk.com/news/fact-check-team/fact-check-team-major-banks-close-their-doors-
amid-rise-in-digital-banking-pnc-jpmorgan-chase-bank-of-america-citizens-federal-deposit-apps-websites-branches-locations
12
“Global Self-Checkout Systems Market Size, Share, Trends, Industry Growth by Component (Systems, Services), by Type (Cash,
Cashless), by Application (Retail, Financial Services, Entertainment, Travel, Healthcare, Others), by Region, and Forecast to 2028,”
Research Corridor, updated March 6, 2024, https://www.researchcorridor.com/self-checkout-systems-market/
10.3 • Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in Information Systems
391

Figure 10.8 Self-checkout systems, which rely on artificial intelligence technology, enable customers to independently complete
purchases. (credit: "Self Checkout" by "pin add"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
LINK TO LEARNING
The processes of self-checkout technology (https://openstax.org/r/109SelfCheckout) have encountered
unexpected challenges, including scanning difficulties, inaccuracy of produce scales, problems with weights
in bagging areas, missed scans, and theft, to name a few. This technology can be costly to a business with a
four-kiosk system, costing six figures, on average. Some organizations are reversing the course on this
technology by putting limits on its use, installing cameras, and even removing systems.
The societal and global impact of emerging technology may not be apparent right away. For example, social
media began in the 1990s with small platforms like Classmates.com, GeoCities.com, and SixDegrees.com, all
with messaging and chat functions. Today, billions of people worldwide use social media daily for purposes
including finding entertainment, interacting with others, and conducting business. Social media has expanded
beyond its original designs to include e-commerce functions that allow users to buy, sell, or trade items, earn
income, and find other financial incentives for use. Businesses often utilize e-commerce functions to run
targeted ads, build brand awareness, generate online sales, and attract a global online following. The
interaction of businesses in real time can foster a sense of community and loyalty.
Another example is the availability and adoption of solar power by consumers. First introduced in the 1980s,
solar power has experienced significant growth as a result of improved solar energy technology. The
conversion of energy from the sun into power for electricity and heat, or solar power, is generated through the
use of solar panels. These can be found for general use on private rooftops or solar farms/fields, and large
areas of land with interconnected solar panels generate large amounts of energy at the same time.
392
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

The advancements in solar power technology along with federal incentives and tax credits in the United States
have increased sales of solar cells. Over five million solar systems have been installed with enough solar
energy-generating systems installed to power 32.5 million homes (Figure 10.9).13 In other parts of the world,
solar technology is being adopted in places where laws have been passed to enable access of solar energy to
their citizens. The adoption and widespread use of this emerging technology have helped consumers lower
electricity bills, increase property values, and reduce dependence on fossil fuels, all positive impacts on public
health and the environment.
Figure 10.9 Solar farms, such as the one shown here, use solar panels to convert energy from the sun into power used to support
electricity and provide heat. (credit: “Hawaii solar; a photovoltaic power station” by Reegan Moen, U.S. Department of Energy/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)
While there are positive societal and global impacts of emerging technology, such as job creation, improved
access to education and health care, and environmental conservation efforts, there can also be negative
consequences. Unintended consequences of emerging technology include increased inequality, job loss, and a
harmful impact on the environment. For example, using AI may be challenging for individuals with different
abilities, reducing the opportunity for them to interact with AI-enabled systems. Similarly, solar power
technologies are limited to those who have the financial means to invest.
LINK TO LEARNING
Read this article from Forbes to learn how AI can exploit consumer vulnerabilities (https://openstax.org/r/
109EthicsAI) if not built and trained ethically, especially in the marketing industry.
The global impact of emerging technologies is also evident across frontiers in information systems. Data
analytics tools and techniques are being used and applied in all aspects of society from transportation to
health care, marketing to education, finance to political campaigns. Public health organizations collect
nonidentifying information on disease prevalence to spur and fund research efforts, provide targeted
medicines, improve efficiencies in health care–related supply chains and logistics, resource health care, and
initiate targeted marketing campaigns aimed at increasing awareness and disease prevention. The year-by-
year identification of different strains of flu and its prevalence is an example of how data analytics can drive
13
"5 Millions Solar Installations: Powering American Communities," Solar Energy Industries Association, updated May 2024,
https://seia.org/5m/
10.3 • Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in Information Systems
393

societal and global change.
We also see the societal and global impacts of data analytics in the frontier of education. A student’s personal
learning experience is enhanced, educational resources are optimized, and the student’s strengths and
weaknesses are identified in order to tailor instruction and set them up for success. The same transformative
effects can be seen in environmental conservation efforts where deforestation, pollution, and climate change
data are collected and used to enact positive change. This is evident, for example, in the World Resources
Institute’s work on global forestry, where analytics is helping to identify deforestation in countries across the
world, improving impacts to climate, biodiversity, and human well-being.14
The Global Community of Research and Innovation
Without research and development, we would not have smartphones, computers, the internet, or any of the
technologies many of us use on a daily basis. Research and development are crucial in ensuring that
technology continues to evolve and improve, and that new and innovative solutions are developed to address
emerging challenges.
The global community of scientists supporting research and innovation continues to make strides toward
furthering new findings, technologies, and processes. And those latest developments in the field of
information systems continue to push to further the potential reach of new technologies worldwide. For
example, global growth in data analytics and the predictive analytics market is expected to grow from $16.41
billion in 2023 to $83.98 billion by 2032.15
Regionally, North America is leading global efforts in data analytics and the predictive analytics market, and
the largest increases in growth are in Europe, Asia-Pacific, Middle East and Africa, and South America.16
Together, countries in these regions are increasingly seeing solution and service gains in banking, financial
services, insurance, health care, telecommunications, and information technology. For example, the banking
industry is using these technologies to customize insurance plans and premium amounts based on user data
and documentation. Large global organizations will dominate these markets as they have increased their
capacity to store, process, and analyze large amounts of data to leverage the outcomes and create marketing
strategies that target customers and improve user experiences.
We can also find global communities working to adopt and expand on these technologies in uses like the
continued adoption and development of 5G. This fifth-generation wireless technology is an example of how
mobile computing is evolving regionally and throughout the world, increasing the speed of use, enhancing
connectivity, and enabling other mobile options while connected. The next generation, 6G technology is
currently being developed in regions throughout the world and is expected to be available in the United States
in 2030.17
How Research and Innovation Lead to Emerging Technologies
Research and innovation have played a significant role in the growth of emerging technologies. Research, or
the systematic process to generate understanding or knowledge, is a precursor to innovation, the process of
using the knowledge generated from research to meet real needs. When we think of research, we might
imagine a scientist behind a microscope. But research can be thought of more broadly, beginning with a broad
idea, leading to preliminary investigation, designing and planning, collecting and interpreting data, and then
disseminating findings.
14
Mikaela Weisse, Elizabeth Goldman, and Sarah Carter, “Forest Pulse: The Latest on the World’s Forests,” World Resources
Institute, updated April 4, 2024, https://research.wri.org/gfr/latest-analysis-deforestation-trends
15
Global Market Overview and Competitive Analysis (Introspective Market Research, May 2024),
https://introspectivemarketresearch.com/reports/data-science-and-predictive-analytics-market/
16
Global Market Overview and Competitive Analysis (Introspective Market Research, May 2024)
https://introspectivemarketresearch.com/reports/data-science-and-predictive-analytics-market/
17
“ITU’s IMT-2030 Vision: Navigating Towards 6G in the Americas,” 5G Americas, September 2024, https://www.5gamericas.org/
itus-imt-2030-vision-navigating-towards-6g-in-the-americas/
394
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

Innovation is a catalyst for change as stagnation or inactivity can impede the growth of a competitive and
fiscally sound organization. The innovation process is generally composed of three systematic steps:
conception, implementation, and marketing (Figure 10.10). It begins with a conceptual idea—its evaluation,
the generation of requirements, and the planning needed for potential implementation. The implementation
stage is where the idea is further developed or constructed, and a prototype or pilot is produced and tested.
Generally, within the marketing step, the prototype or pilot application is moved to production or to launch for
use. The organization may also choose specific markets to release the product.
Figure 10.10 Innovation can occur in three steps: conception, implementation, and marketing. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
FUTURE TECHNOLOGY
Agricultural Technologies
The agricultural industry continues to make research and innovation gains in addressing food insecurity,
animal welfare, the environmental impacts of meat production, and the overall protection of human health.
Research and innovation advances in tissue engineering techniques and regenerative medicine
technologies have led to the production of cultured or cultivated meat, produced from culturing animal
cells in vitro. These advances represent new and innovative approaches that significantly enhance the
efficiency, productivity, and sustainability of farming practices as they integrate digital tools, sustainable
practices such as drone monitoring, precision agriculture using GPS, and automation and robotics. New
Harvest, a leading U.S.-based nonprofit research organization, is pioneering these emerging technologies
with the goal of reducing dependence on animal agriculture by using cells instead of animals.18
Through its continuous research and innovation processes, India has become a global leader in information
technology and business process outsourcing (BPO), a service industry that supports outsourcing of
business service operations to third-party vendors. It is estimated that these services have garnered $157
billion in the fiscal year 2021–22, comprising $106 billion of information technology services and $51 billion of
BPO services, respectively.19 This growth has also contributed to the emergence of an Indian workforce
trained to solve complex problems and manage the technical functions of global corporations including
consulting, design, product development, business process management, and infrastructure support.
Governments, think tanks, and private enterprises have also made major contributions to the research of new
discoveries and uses for emerging technologies. The U.S. government has contributed to research and
innovation through its support of federally funded agencies, such as the Department of Defense, the National
Science Foundation, National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the Environmental Protection
Agency Office of Research and Development. According to the National Science Board, the proposed fiscal year
2025 budget for federal research and development is approximately $201.9 billion, with the Department of
Defense (DOD) accounting for 46 percent and the Department of Health and Human Services accounting for
25 percent.20
18
“New Harvest Is a Field-Building Organization Advancing Cellular Agriculture Globally,” New Harvest, accessed December 19,
2024, https://new-harvest.org/
19
“How India Is Emerging as the World’s Technology and Services Hub,” EY India, January 27, 2023, https://www.ey.com/en_in/
india-at-100/how-india-is-emerging-as-the-world-s-technology-and-services-hub
10.3 • Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in Information Systems
395

The RAND Corporation, considered one of the top think tanks in the world, is an example of an organization or
institution that maintains a scholarly and interdisciplinary approach to research on particular issues, policies,
or ideas. The RAND Corporation receives public and private funds to support research efforts, educational
opportunities, analyses, consulting, training, and other services, with $390 million in revenue in 2023.21 Areas
of expertise include public policy, education, environment, national security, law, and corporate governance,
and also science, technology, infrastructure, defense, and economic development.
Questions in Emerging Technologies
While there is an emphasis on a multidisciplinary approach for emerging technologies in information systems
that draws from such fields as computer science, telecommunications, operations research, economics, and
cognitive sciences, the field is constantly evolving, and there are many questions to explore. Here are some of
the central issues.
How can we ensure the ethical and responsible use of emerging technologies such as AI, blockchain, and the
IoT? Ensuring the ethical and responsible use of emerging technologies should occur at individual and
organizational levels as there is a great deal at stake. As complex technologies are developed, it is necessary to
consider bias, fairness, transparency, privacy, and data protection as well as the human control of these
technologies. Additional proactive ethical strategies to consider include the following:
•
Promote open and transparent dialogue among technical teams, users, leadership, and other
stakeholders about the ethical implications needed to navigate the complex landscape that technologies
may bring.
•
Foster collaboration and engage diverse stakeholder perspectives to create, adopt, and promote ethical
standards.
•
Embed ethics within the design through all stages from conception to implementation. Be sure to address
questions in the integration to cover processes in place, levels of access, responsible parties or
departments to respond, and ongoing monitoring processes.
•
Invest in research and education of emerging technologies to aid in the development of ethical guidelines.
How can we design information systems that are resilient to cyberattacks and other security threats? As new
technologies and attack vectors emerge, how can we keep systems and data safe? Organizations have
recognized the need to design information systems that are resilient to cyberattacks and other security
threats. Creating cyber-resilient strategies is key to safeguarding systems and data, such as the following best
practices:
•
Identify emerging trends in cybersecurity. Explore the specific technology and the threats that may be
inherent in them. Discuss the challenges posed for each, the potential controls, validating techniques and
other means to manage their vulnerabilities with leadership and other stakeholders.
•
Build a resilient infrastructure. Be sure to build a comprehensive cybersecurity infrastructure that includes
all the hardware, software, firewalls, encryption protocols, and regular security surveillance needed to
mitigate potential risks.
•
Collaborate with external partners. Explore collaborative communities to include vendors, industry peers,
and governing organizations. The value of partnerships with external partners may far outweigh the cost
of an attack.
•
Explore the cybersecurity landscape. Research the evolving nature of threats, methods to address them,
and potential impacts to the organization, such as regulatory penalties, financial losses, reputational
damage, and the loss of customer trust.
•
Implement training and security protocols within the organization to include user controls, privileges, and
data access. Multifactor authentication and regular access reviews can also aid in strengthening security.
20
Laurie Harris, Lisa S. Benson, Marcy E. Gallo, et al., Federal Research and Development (R&D) Funding: FY2025 (Congressional
Research Service, December 9, 2024), https://crsreports.congress.gov/product/pdf/R/R48307/2
21
2023 RAND Annual Report (RAND Corporation, April 10, 2024) 39, https://www.rand.org/pubs/corporate_pubs/CPA1065-4.html
396
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

•
Develop an incident response plan. Creating a culture of prompt incident reporting to test the
effectiveness of systems is needed to identify areas of improvement.
How can we leverage emerging technologies to improve health-care delivery and patient outcomes? For
example, can AI be used to diagnose diseases more accurately or predict patient outcomes more effectively?
Emerging technologies are increasingly used throughout the health-care sector to improve health-care
delivery and patient outcomes. According to the Health Information and Management Systems Society, a
leading organization driving reformation of health-care delivery through information and technology, health-
care stakeholders are optimistic about emerging health-care-related tools and technologies and their ability to
improve accuracy and efficiency in care.22 Another study found that 80 percent of 80 percent of health
organizations intend to expand their use of digital systems between 2022 and 2027.23 Figure 10.11 shows
some of these emerging technologies and some examples of how they are being used to support health-care
delivery:
•
Artificial intelligence has been leveraged in areas such as clinical decision support where presenting
conditions can be narrowed down to further identify a diagnosis or causation of a presenting health
challenge. It can also improve the accuracy of the diagnosis using predictive analyses and other
functionality. Additionally, AI has been used to support standard operating procedures, ensuring that
patient care protocols are consistently adhered to.
•
Cloud computing has enabled health-care organizations to expand their capacity for data storage and
scalability. Cloud computing–enabled interoperability in devices supports collaboration and data-sharing
capabilities between patients and their care team.
•
The management and secure transfer of patient medical records through hospitals, pharmacies,
diagnostic laboratories, and other health-care entities have been attributed to the use of blockchain
technologies. Its system also enables increased protection and safeguards of health-care data.
•
The IoT enhances patient monitoring capabilities, medication adherence, and overall well-being. IoT-
enabled devices support videoconferencing, allowing patients to confer with their medical team remotely.
These devices also support the distribution of medical information where patients can use their mobile
devices to track health measures or check the results of medical tests.
22
“Future of Healthcare Report: Exploring Healthcare Stakeholders’ Expectations for the Next Chapter,” HIMSS, August 11, 2021,
https://www.himss.org/resources/future-healthcare-report-exploring-healthcare-stakeholders-expectations-next-chapter
23
Bill Siwicki, “Where to Invest Increasing Digital Health Dollars,” Healthcare IT News, August 24, 2022,
https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/where-invest-increasing-digital-health-dollars
10.3 • Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in Information Systems
397

Figure 10.11 Emerging technologies support several segments of health-care delivery to include clinical integration and operational
optimization. (credit: modification of work “Figure 2” by Abdulatif Alabdulatif, Ibrahim Khalil, and Mohammad Saidur Rahman,
“Security of Blockchain and AI-Empowered Smart Healthcare: Application-Based Analysis,” Applied Sciences 12, no. 21 (October 31,
2022): 11039, https://doi.org/10.3390/app122111039, CC BY 4.0)
What are the implications of emerging technologies for the future of work? How will automation and AI impact
the job market, and how can we prepare workers for this new reality? There are some who believe that
emerging technologies will take away jobs. A more optimistic viewpoint explores the potential these
technologies will have to not only enhance and transform the skills and competencies of the current workforce
but also add new types of roles to augment existing roles. For example, traditional sales jobs (cold-calling,
door-to-door) may have decreased due to the introduction and use of new technologies; however, new
opportunities have been created and leveraged for companies to hit their sales targets. For example,
automating sales activities can increase efficiencies such as lead qualification and generation, the use of virtual
assistants to manage human tasks more efficiently, and algorithms to identify promising prospects. Data
analytics can also create algorithms to identify opportunities and customer-focused prospects. Additionally,
social media provides marketing options, reducing the need for cold-calling, improving the reach of services,
and increasing the potential to attain sales goals. According to the Harvard Business Review, there are several
capabilities companies need to have or build to realize the value of AI to exceed its costs.24 They recommend
that companies change behaviors to maximize learning, control experimentation to determine the value of a
potential full organizational rollout, measure the value of the technology for the business, manage the data as
current data stores may need to be augmented to support the potential volume of data captured, and develop
personnel to engage with the technology to improve productivity and operations.
24
Tom Davenport and John J. Sviokla, “The 6 Disciplines Companies Need to Get the Most Out of Gen AI,” Harvard Business Review,
July 8, 2024, https://hbr.org/2024/07/the-6-disciplines-companies-need-to-get-the-most-out-of-gen-ai
398
10 • Emerging Technologies and Frontiers of Information Systems
Access for free at openstax.org

How can we ensure that emerging technologies are accessible to all, regardless of income, location, or ability?
How can we bridge the digital divide and ensure that everyone has equal access to the benefits of new
technologies? The adoption of responsible and inclusive approaches is necessary to ensure inclusivity and
accessibility of emerging technologies. According to the World Health Organization, an estimated 1.3 billion
people, or 16 percent of the global population, experience significant physical and/or mental disabilities.25
Best practices for inclusive and accessible design include conducting user research, engaging diverse
perspectives, prioritizing features, and creating flexible designs that are tested and iterated. We must bridge
the gap between the technological world and users to increase accessibility. Some technologies have been
developed with accessibility challenges in mind, such as GPT-4 offering advanced capabilities such as visual
assistance to those who are visually impaired. Apple has introduced a wide range of tools to improve voice-
controlled and assistive technology functions within its devices. Additionally, Google has improved its
navigation features within Google Maps so users can access wheelchair accessibility, walking routes, and live
experiences for those with visual impairments.
As emerging technologies continue to evolve, research and development will continue to address new issues
and ensure that technology advances and meets society’s needs. An important part of this will be addressing
the power demands of AI and other emerging technologies. To ensure that organizations have sufficient
resources to support these power needs, research and development need to focus on sustainable energy
practices. This may include efforts such as the development of processors that are more energy efficient and
collaboration on open sources to share power. Efforts to manage the power consumption of emerging
technologies can reduce these technologies’ environmental footprints as well as improve efficiencies and cost-
effectiveness.
ETHICS IN IS
Ethics in the United Kingdom
There are growing calls for ethics in research and innovation, particularly as emerging technologies are
increasing their global reach and impact. The UK Research and Innovation organization is one such entity
that has acknowledged the need for collective responsibility where funders, researchers, stakeholders, and
the public all have a role to play. The organization says that the responsibility goes beyond the
consideration of risk and regulation and should also be aligned with creating value for society in an ethical
and responsible way. The Framework for Responsible Research and Innovation was created as a guiding
process to promote creativity and opportunity for science and innovation.26
25
“Disability,” World Health Organization, March 7, 2023, https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/disability-and-health
26
“Framework for Responsible Research and Innovation,” UK Research and Innovation, updated March 16, 2023,
https://www.ukri.org/who-we-are/epsrc/our-policies-and-standards/framework-for-responsible-innovation/
10.3 • Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in Information Systems
399

Key Terms
augmented reality (AR)
technology that overlays digital information onto a user's environment in real time
blockchain
shared, immutable ledger that facilitates the process of recording transactions and tracking
assets
business process outsourcing (BPO)
service industry that supports outsourcing business service operations
to third-party vendors
convergence
joining of two or more different entities; in the context of computing and technology, into a
single device or system
cryptography
process of hiding or coding information so that only the intended recipient can read it
emerging technology
software or hardware that enhances the user experience by obtaining or using
information and data in new and exciting ways; can be used to describe new technologies or the continuing
development of existing technologies
enterprise modeling and integration (EMI)
process that uses computer-based tools to model the business
structure and facilitate the connection of its technology, work, and information flow across an organization
generative AI
type of artificial intelligence that creates new content or ideas in the form of text, images,
videos, music, audio, and other forms of data
information economics
branch of microeconomics that analyzes how economic decisions and consumer
behaviors are influenced by knowledge and power
information systems frontiers
latest developments in the field of information systems, exploring new
research areas, innovative applications, and emerging technologies that have the potential to significantly
impact the field
machine learning
use of algorithms and models that enable machines to learn from or make decisions
about data without specific programming
mobile computing
strategies, technologies, products, and services that enable users to access information
without restricting the user to a single geographic location
natural language processing
teaching machines to understand and generate human language; involves
tasks such as speech recognition, text analysis, and language translation to build this understanding
quantum computing
use of quantum mechanics principles to perform complex calculations exponentially
faster than traditional computers
robotics
branch of engineering and computer science that involves the conception, design, building, and
operation of robots, creating intelligent machines that can assist humans with a variety of tasks
self checkout (SCO)
machines enabled with artificial intelligence technology, product images, barcodes, and
other mechanisms for customers to complete purchases
virtual reality (VR)
computer-generated environments that simulate reality and allow users to interact with
three-dimensional environments
Summary
10.1 Defining Emerging Technologies
•
Emerging technology is defined as software or hardware that enhances the user experience by obtaining
or using information and data in new and compelling ways. It includes novel technologies and the
continuing development of existing technologies.
•
Emerging technology can be found in many areas including education, information technology, and AI,
and continues to have great potential to provide synergies with other technologies of similar or different
functionalities.
•
Characteristics of an emerging technology include its novelty or newness, rapid advancement, and
disruptive potential.
•
Emerging technologies may be developed from a combination of private and/or public entities, such as
government agencies and educational institutions.
400
10 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org

•
Blockchain, AI, AR, and VR are all real-world applications of emerging technologies.
•
Opportunities, challenges, and risks are apparent with these technologies and should be considered for
each technology.
10.2 The Evolving Frontiers of Information Systems
•
Frontiers of information systems are the latest developments in the field of information systems.
•
IS frontiers explore new research areas, innovative applications, and emerging technologies that have the
potential to significantly impact the field.
•
The convergence of IS frontiers and emerging technologies provides opportunities for two or more of
these technologies, like AI and data analytics, to converge, which can help organizations analyze vast
amounts of data in real time and inform decision-making.
•
The opportunities, challenges, and risks associated with these information systems continue to evolve as
they are further integrated for business and personal use.
10.3 Societal and Global Importance of Emerging Technologies in
Information Systems
•
Emerging technologies can have far-reaching societal and global consequences.
•
The emergence of innovative technologies, such as AI-enabled customer service systems in banking, SCO
machines, e-commerce-enabled websites, and solar power, has revolutionized societal interactions and
affected worldwide change in economy, culture, public policy, public services, health, and the
environment.
•
Data analytics tools and techniques are being applied in all aspects of society, helping organizations to
leverage their functionality to support business processes.
•
Emerging technologies and innovations are expected to continue to grow globally to include data
analytics, IoT, and others, with solution and service gains in the banking, financial services, and insurance
sector, health care, telecommunications, and information technology.
•
Research is a precursor to innovation, and it begins with a broad idea and ends with the dissemination of
findings. The idea, or concept, evolves through specific process steps to where it will be available for
market use.
•
Emerging technologies will continue to evolve and so will be of great importance in research and
development. As the field continues to evolve, new questions will arise, and researchers will need to work
together to find answers.
Review Questions
1. Which of the following statements about emerging technologies is false?
a. Emerging technologies only include hardware.
b. They can be described by their novelty, disruptive potential, and rapid advancement.
c. Augmented reality, virtual reality, Internet of Things and artificial intelligence can be considered
emerging technologies.
d. The progressive nature of these technologies allows for synergies with other technologies.
2. What term refers to digital money used for online transactions?
a. artificial intelligence
b. blockchain
c. bitcoin
d. augmented reality
3. Which statement best describes the convergence of frontiers of information systems and emerging
technologies?
a. Connecting Internet of Things and devices creates a disruptive environment and negatively impacts
user experiences.
10 • Review Questions
401

b. It enables organizations to create new opportunities for innovation and growth.
c. Blockchain combined with augmented reality and virtual reality can lead to profit losses for
organizations.
d. The role of data analysts will no longer be needed as the convergence of emerging technologies and
innovation systems has the potential to accomplish analysis-related tasks.
4. Frontiers of information systems present several opportunities, challenges, and risks for use. Which of the
following is an opportunity?
a. It can increase compatibility between networked systems.
b. It will lead to a reduction in hardware and software costs, increasing the overall costs of processing
data.
c. Data breaches become of increasing concern.
d. Adherence challenges to regulatory compliance requirements may be at risk.
5. Which of the following is true about societal and global impacts of emerging technologies?
a. They only affect small groups.
b. Emerging technologies have only had a small effect on communities.
c. Academia is the only area of societal change.
d. Artificial intelligence–enabled systems are examples of the societal and global impacts of emerging
technologies.
6. Why is solar power considered an emerging technology?
a. It has seen widespread adoption, helping consumers to lower their electricity bills.
b. Laws have been passed to prevent companies from marketing these products to consumers.
c. Economies have been negatively impacted by its widespread use.
d. It has decreased dependency on fossil fuels.
7. How do data analytics support health-care efforts?
a. It helps to identify different strands of the flu and its prevalence in communities.
b. The data collected reduce efficiencies in health care–related supply chains and logistics.
c. It provides information on health-care resourcing to help organizations identify staffing and financial
needs.
d. It helps to initiate targeted marketing campaigns aimed at increasing awareness and disease
prevention.
8. Which is not a correct statement about research and innovation in technology?
a. It has contributed to significant growth in the data analytics and predictive analytics markets.
b. Global growth in technologies has been experienced in several countries in varying sectors of business.
c. Research and innovation activities further new findings, technologies, and processes.
d. It has been funded primarily by governments in all countries.
9. What is the purpose of research as it relates to technology?
a. It is the precursor to innovation.
b. It is a secondary component within the design process.
c. Research provides the full picture of how the technology is supposed to function.
d. Research prevents innovation from being adopted by consumers.
10. Which of the following is a true statement about the process of innovation?
a. It follows the systematic steps: conception, implementation, marketing, and communication.
b. Analyzing and recording information is the first step in identifying and selecting resources.
c. The scientific research process and associated skills are at the core of the research process.
d. Information must be recorded and communicated immediately.
11. Which of the following is a false statement as it relates to the Internet of Things in health care?
402
10 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

a. It enhances patient monitoring capabilities, medication adherence, and overall well-being.
b. It supports the distribution of medical information.
c. Patients can use their mobile devices to check the results of medical tests.
d. It creates challenges in videoconferencing with the medical care team.
Check Your Understanding Questions
1. What are the major differences between virtual reality and augmented reality?
2. What is the U.S. Department of Energy’s relationship to emerging technologies?
3. Describe how blockchain technology supports the safe use of cryptocurrency.
4. How do augmented reality and virtual reality enhance user shopping experiences?
5. What is the difference between emerging technologies and frontiers of information systems?
6. What are the main goals in using different tools and techniques in data analytics?
7. What are some opportunities provided by mobile computing technologies?
8. What is a drawback to not analyzing big data in a timely manner?
9. What is the relationship of emerging technologies and society from a global perspective?
10. How are businesses able to leverage e-commerce functions using social media?
11. How does data analytics support education?
12. What is the importance of research in innovation?
13. How do research and innovation lead to emerging technologies?
14. What is the purpose of fostering collaboration of stakeholders in creating ethical and responsible use of
emerging technologies?
15. How does the identification of emerging trends in cybersecurity help to create a cyber-resilient
information system?
Application Questions
1. Discuss the benefits of blockchain technology in health-care organizations.
2. Watch this Wall Street Journal video (https://openstax.org/r/109BatteryPlant) that highlights an engine
factory in Germany that is being transformed into a battery plant. Why is so much software development
involved in the making of electric vehicles? Why might electric vehicle start-ups have a certain advantage
in writing software? Why might software development be a difficult task for traditional automakers like VW
to manage?
3. Discuss how banks have optimized many of their customer service functions with the use of artificial
intelligence.
4. Describe how frontiers of information systems technology is used to enact positive social change.
5. Business process outsourcing has evolved as a major technology-supporting industry. Discuss the
importance of business process outsourcing and its impact on the industry.
6. How has the evolution of technology changed telemedicine?
10 • Check Your Understanding Questions
403

404
10 • Application Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
