Figure 4.1 Something as simple as picking up medicine from a pharmacy entails a complex set of actions that require careful design
by systems analysts who work in information systems development. (credit: modification of work “Controversy Surrounds
Prescription Drug Monitoring Program” by Jiselle Macalaguin, KOMUnews/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Chapter Outline
4.1 Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
4.2 Defining the Business Problem and User Requirements
4.3 Technical Design Methodologies and Practical Applications
4.4 Designing for Mobile Devices and Other Design Considerations
Introduction
When you step into a pharmacy to pick up a prescription, the simple act is one point in a complex set of
systems and actions. The system checks your prescription and ensures that it is reliable and valid. It then
allows the pharmacist to dispense the requisite prescription and provides the notes to be printed for the
patient and/or caregiver to ensure that the right dosage is taken for the time frame prescribed by the
physician. In some cases, the information system also checks for allergies or other medications that may result
in an adverse reaction for the patient. As a safety measure, this information, if available, is also provided in the
notes provided with the prescription. This is just one example of how your daily life intersects with the design
and development of information systems.
4.1 Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Describe the concept of systems analysis and design
•
Identify methodologies and tools used in systems analysis and design
•
Explain, compare, and contrast the software development life cycle (SDLC) and Agile software
development
•
Describe the roles and responsibilities of analysis and design teams
Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
4

The evolution of software projects from conception to implementation relies on tools that guide the design
and ensure alignment with user needs and organizational goals. Throughout system development , the
contributions of various teams and the methodologies they adopt play a pivotal role in shaping outcomes,
with each phase offering unique challenges and opportunities for collaboration. To understand the concept of
systems analysis and the design methodologies used for application development, you must also become
familiar with the software development life cycle (SDLC) and Agile software development, as well as the roles
and responsibilities of the analysis and design teams.
Systems Analysis and Design
The stepwise process for evaluating and developing information systems by understanding the needs of the
business to improve or develop effective and efficient functioning solutions to technical challenges is called
systems analysis and design. You may recall from Chapter 1 Fundamentals of Information Systems that
information systems combine the people, processes, data, hardware, and software needed to collect, store,
process, analyze, and distribute data. Examples of information systems include order processing, inventory
control, human resource management, and sales management systems. Consider one information system you
have probably encountered already: a prescription order process linking a prescribing doctor to a pharmacy. In
Figure 4.2, you can view the workflow of a prescription request traveling from the prescriber through an
electronic health record system toward the pharmacy staff and its system. In this scenario, there is an
intermediate interaction with an e-prescription vendor’s system that is designed to translate and process that
request so the receiving pharmacy staff can satisfy the doctor’s request for a patient’s medication.
Figure 4.2 The prescription order process involves several systematic steps beginning with the prescriber sending a patient’s
medicine order to an electronic health record database, which forwards it to a vendor, who then routes the order to a pharmacy’s
internal system and staff, who finally provide the medicine to the customer. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY 4.0 license; credit capsule: modification of work “Pill – The Noun Project” by Noelia Bravo/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0; credit
hospital sign: modification of work “Ic local hospital” by Google Inc./Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 4.0)
Who would think there were so many steps involved with picking up a prescription from a local pharmacy?
Starting at the doctor’s office, the physician submits a prescription order through an online ordering system to
the patient’s preferred pharmacy. The pharmacy, upon receipt of the prescription order, processes the
prescription accordingly by validating patient information such as insurance, reviewing the aspects of the
116
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

order, preparing the medication, and conducting a final review before providing the patient with the
medication and instructions for use. There are many systems at work in this scenario—systems that connect
users (i.e., medical and pharmacy staff), hardware (i.e., computer, keyboard, central processing unit or CPU,
and wireless routers), software (electronic health record or EHR, ePrescribe software, and pharmacy benefit
management tools), and other devices, working together to provide services.
Businesses initiate systems analysis and design to assess workflows, identify improvements, and create
efficient systems. Some companies have formal processes with a task force led by a senior manager, while
others approach systems analysis and design on an ad hoc basis. Organizations may prioritize projects using
various criteria, tools, techniques, and input from multiple departments in order to align projects with
business objectives. These initiatives often lead to systems analysis that can inform future design changes.
LINK TO LEARNING
The International Institute for Business Analysis (IIBA) is an internationally recognized organization that
works on developing industry standard business analysis practices and resources. The IIBA, which has
global reach, also considers a business’s mission, values, and goals to implement a systems thinking
approach. Learn more about the IIBA’s practice of business analysis (https://openstax.org/r/
109IIBABusinAny) from IIBA’s In the News section of their website.
Benefits of Systems Analysis and Design
Systems analysis and design offers several benefits to an organization, with the primary advantage being the
identification of operational efficiencies through improvements to existing systems. This process also allows
organizations to align their information systems with their strategic objectives, identify the risk of potential
threats to processes early, minimize resources and costs, and improve the overall quality, efficiency,
productivity, and usability of their systems.
A systems analyst is a professional whose primary function is to utilize the systems analysis and design
process to support information systems and to solve challenges associated with or posed by using the
information systems. Systems analysts are often regarded as a conduit between information technology
departments and business areas of the organization as they work to understand how an information system is
used to support business functions and identify the challenges that persist and areas that need improvement.
Although systems analysts are increasingly serving in information technology departments, they may also
work in different areas of the business, such as operations, finance, marketing, sales, or human resources.
Systems Analysis
The process called systems analysis identifies the opportunities that can be discovered by examining
business problems and develops possible solutions an organization may implement to address these
problems. Systems analysis generally involves the following three activities: understanding the current
business problem; determining the system requirements, constraints, and information needs; and generating
a systems analysis report (Figure 4.3).
4.1 • Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
117

Figure 4.3 Understanding the current business problem; determining system requirements, constraints, and information needs; and
generating a systems analysis report are the three basic components of systems analysis. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license; credit left: modification of work “Noun Planning 1325509” by Arafat Uddin/Wikimedia Commons,
CC BY 4.0; credit middle: modification of work “Noun Project problems icon 2417098” by Template, TH/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY
3.0; credit right: modification of work “Noun project - Meeting with laptops” by Slava Strizh/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)
Understanding the Current Business Problem
In defining the business problem, detailed information about the information system is gathered and analyzed
using a variety of tools and techniques. To understand the business problem, the systems analyst first
identifies stakeholders. A stakeholder is an individual or group who has a vested interest in or concern about
a business decision. They may be internal or external to an organization and may include the community,
government entities, employees, customers, investors, suppliers, or trade unions and associations. After
identifying the stakeholders, the systems analyst begins the task of gathering information about the system to
gain a better understanding of its functionalities and any challenges it currently faces. This information may
include the purpose of the system, inputs and outputs, functional capabilities, number of users and levels of
access, ease of use, accessibility, and challenges associated with its use.
Common methods used to gather this information or data include:
•
System documentation review: The system documentation describes the system and its parts. It is used
to understand how the system functions as well as serving as reference information. It may include
requirements documentation, user guides, source code, architecture and design descriptions, and
frequently asked questions (FAQs). By examining system documentation, the analyst may uncover how the
system was originally designed to perform and changes made to the system since its initial use within the
organization. The analyst may find that existing documentation may not be current, accurate, and/or
complete. In that case, the analyst can work to revise and update the documentation for currency,
accuracy, and completeness. Information-gathering may also involve examining policy documents and
regulatory rules shaping the needs of the system.
•
Surveys: A survey is a common form of information gathering. It allows larger groups of users to respond
to an inquiry about a system so they can provide insight into its use. Surveys are usually affordable to
administer, take minimal time, and can involve a variety of stakeholders across the organization.
•
Interviews: The systems analyst may conduct interviews of different systems users and roles. To prepare
for these interviews, the analyst will identify the objectives for the interview, generate and administer
interview questions, document the results, and evaluate interview responses. Interviews may be
structured (i.e., use the same interview questions and methods) or unstructured (i.e., involve no set format
or predetermined questions). Interviews may take longer than other methods of information gathering
but are useful in gaining insights that may not present themselves in surveys.
•
Observations: Making observations about an information system generally involves noting how users
perform their functions through and in relation to the system and, in turn, how the system responds.
Observations may be passive (e.g., watching users perform actions without interference or influence) or
118
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

active (e.g., engaging with users and asking questions about the activities they perform). Web analytics or
metrics may be used as a gauge of observations made. Inputs and outputs of the system are observed
and then documented for further review and analysis.
•
Data analysis: Once the system documentation is collected, it is systematically reviewed, cleansed, sorted,
and condensed so that conclusions and insights can be drawn to help solve business problems. Generally
utilizing qualitative and/or quantitative/statistical analysis techniques, data analysis can be an iterative
process where the team may need to refine the data gathering process to gain a further understanding of
the data presented.
Determining System Requirements, Constraints, and Information Needs
System requirements are the capabilities stakeholders request to make a functioning system that supports
their business needs. They can be categorized as functional, nonfunctional, business, technical, legal/
regulatory, and/or performance related. Generally, the systems analyst will collaborate with stakeholders to
gather these requirements. Once collected and defined, requirements are then placed in categories and
prioritized based on criteria important to the business. As you will learn in 4.3 Technical Design Methodologies
and Practical Applications, systems analysts may go further and develop user interface designs that give a
representation of how system requirements interact with the data rules and roles and even the constraints of
the system functionality.
Access to system data about usage and functionality of the system is a key component to the user
requirements. Reporting functionality that provides usage data at both the macro and micro levels can be
helpful to assess both the system and the users of the system. One example of how system data serve as a key
component of user requirements can be found in customer service call histories at data centers. Data about
the details of a call (i.e., length, representative, day/time, reason for calling, resolution status) are usable for a
variety of business purposes, including training, service improvements, and employee recognition. For
example, the day and time associated with a call can point to a number of issues such as bandwidth availability
or system processing issues, and this information can lead to changes in end-user training, needed system
improvements, or identification of a group-specific issue. These system/user requirements and all supporting
information are then reviewed, evaluated, and finalized with input from stakeholder users.
ETHICS IN IS
Values-Based Engineering
Today, algorithms and artificial intelligence are driving the techniques used for systems analysis, design,
and development. This can lead to ethical concerns, eroding user trust. For example, a 2023 study revealed
that Google’s job search tools returned more higher-paying positions to men rather than job seekers of
other gender identities. In addition, job applicant tracking systems are often found to favor words in
résumés more closely associated with men.1 These systems have also placed nonnative speakers at a lower
rank because of inherent bias from AI training on only one specific language.
The process of values-based engineering (VbE) helps to address these challenges within the approaches to
analysis, design, and development. This is accomplished by defining, prioritizing, addressing, and
integrating values into the requirements process. VbE is applicable to both functional and nonfunctional
requirements through tools, standards, and best practice guidelines.
Generating a Systems Analysis Report
The systems analyst typically provides interim feedback to stakeholders throughout the process, and the final
1
IBM Data and AI Team, “Shedding Light on AI Bias with Real World Examples,” IBM, October 16, 2023, https://www.ibm.com/think/
topics/shedding-light-on-ai-bias-with-real-world-examples
4.1 • Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
119

step involves generating a systems analysis report. This report is likely to include recommended solutions to
address or resolve the information system problem, and these solutions may take the form of changes in
business processes, including systems improvements, elimination, or changes.
LINK TO LEARNING
A systems analysis report often takes the form of a feasibility study. Review this example of a feasibility
study template (https://openstax.org/r/109Feasibility) that might be shared with stakeholders. It also
features a survey asking shareholders to assess the viability of a proposed project.
Systems Design
A systems design is an organizational approach that aims to improve an existing system or to develop a
newer one. This process involves doing the technical work of defining the data, interfaces, and overall
architecture of a system based on user requirements and determining how these elements communicate with
each other to produce a reliable, robust, and well-documented system.
Before designs are made, the organization needs to decide whether to develop the new system or improve the
existing one by outsourcing, buying off-the-shelf, or using in-house development. In-house systems
development typically leads to systems design that generally includes data design, interface design, and
process design, which could be performed in any order.
•
Data design: The activity of data design is when data and the actionable components resulting from the
systems analysis process are translated from their raw formats and combined into understandable
formats such as textual data (e.g., TXT), tabular data (e.g., spreadsheets), or images (e.g., PNG or JPEG) is
called data design. At this stage, you can envision how the data and actionable components blend and
create patterns, correlations, and trends into interactive systems. This is where works is done to reduce
the complexity and improve the understanding of the information presented into usable formats.
•
Interface design: The process of interface design refers to designing the visual layout and functional
elements of a product or system, and it involves using an understanding of people and processes to drive
the final design outcomes.
•
Process design: The effort to further understand a business’s processes and how to improve them is called
process design. It can support decision-making on new business ventures, expansions, and other
business functions by breaking down the product into parts and identifying areas of operational
efficiencies.
Tools in Systems Analysis and Design
Several tools play a part in systems analysis and design. Several of the most common are data dictionaries,
simulations, pseudocode, structured English, and unified modeling language. A data dictionary is a database
that houses the details of system data, its properties, entity relationships, and any reference documentation. A
simulation is a model that mimics the operation of an improved or proposed system. The plain English steps
for an algorithm or other system that cannot be used in a compiler are called pseudocode, and structured
English is a sequence of decision rules that uses the English language with the syntax of structured
programming and the convention of IF-THEN-ELSE. Another tool that can be used to lay out the blueprint at
various levels in a system is a simplified modeling language called unified modeling language (UML).
These tools are useful in creating diagrams of various system functions and relationships to gain deeper
understanding during systems analysis. A data flow diagram (DFD) is a graphical representation of the
information flow of a process or system. Another helpful diagram type is a UML diagram, which can show
lower-level user interactions with the system as well as a high-level overviews of several activities working
together in the system. A UML diagram represents a broad category of tools that are commonly used in
120
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

systems analysis and design. These diagrams outline how a system will function from a user’s perspective, and
they feature use cases, sequence diagrams, activity diagrams, state diagrams, and class diagrams.
•
Use cases: A use case describes those individuals who will use and interact with the system. In the
scenario from Figure 4.2 of getting a prescription filled, the use case would map out how each user (the
patient, the doctor, the pharmacy, the insurance company) interacts in the system. UML diagrams can also
be accompanied by a written use case, which includes details about the interaction of the users with the
system rather than simply a visual representation.
•
Sequence diagrams: A sequence diagram is used to illustrate a particular part of the system, not the entire
system. They are specifically used when parts of the system must work in a certain order (Figure 4.4).
Returning to the sample scenario, for the patient to eventually pick up their prescription, a doctor must
first write that prescription and send that information to the pharmacy. Those system actions have to
occur in that order. A patient cannot go to the pharmacy and get their medication prior to the prescription
order coming from the doctor. The sequence diagram provides a general overview of the sequential
process in the system.
•
Activity diagrams: An activity diagram is used to represent how several use cases are coordinated together
in a system. They are used to visualize more complex activities in the overall system (Figure 4.5).
•
State diagrams: A state diagram is similar to an activity diagram; however, it is used to visualize behavior in
a system based on the state the system is in. For example, the prescription ordering system might behave
differently if the medication ordered by the doctor belongs to a certain class of controlled substances. The
state diagram would then include the additional reporting procedures or other related activities that are
required before the medication can be released to the patient (Figure 4.6).
•
Class diagrams: A class diagram provides the building blocks for the system. These diagrams show each
class and its associated attributes. The diagrams also show the relationship between classes in the system.
For example, in the prescription ordering scenario, the patient is a class with attributes such as name,
address, and insurance provider. The pharmacy itself is also a class, with attributes that might include
location and medications stocked.
Figure 4.4 To easily understand how part of a system works, a sequence diagram can be helpful. This simplified sequence diagram
shows how a patient can get a prescription. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
4.1 • Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
121

Figure 4.5 An activity diagram illustrates complex activities in the system for better understanding. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
122
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

Figure 4.6 A state diagram illustrates different behaviors of the system dependent on the state the system is in. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
Software Development Life Cycle and Agile Software Development
The software development life cycle (SDLC) is a framework that defines the stages of software development,
from its inception to its retirement, providing a blueprint of the tasks to be completed for each stage of the
cycle (Figure 4.7). Following the recommended SDLC process will lead to a quality product that was created in a
systematic and disciplined fashion. The six stages of the SDLC process are analysis, design, development,
testing, deployment, and maintenance.
1.
Analysis: In the analysis stage, time is spent with the customer to collect relevant information needed to
develop the product, keeping the potential design and code in mind. Business analysts and project
managers are generally involved in this activity, especially when meetings with the customer will generate
user requirements or aspects of a solution, stated by stakeholders, that are needed to support specific
needs and expectations of a business process or product. Systems analysts make sure to discuss each
aspect of the requirements with the stakeholder to remove ambiguity and to increase clarity and
understanding.
2.
Design: During the design stage, the user requirements are used as inputs for the design approach. The
4.1 • Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
123

developer reviews this information to assess the prepared software against the requirements of the end
users. Design specifications are created, reviewed by stakeholders, and approved for development.
3.
Development: The development stage is sometimes called the implementation or coding phase as this is
where these activities begin. The design is translated into source code or computer-legible
language—meaning the developer builds the system in a coded language using coding guidelines and
programming tools. This stage is the longest in the SDLC life cycle.
4.
Testing: Once the development stage is complete, testing of the design is initiated to validate the system
functions against the requirements and to identify any bugs or defects within the coding. Often, this
occurs within a separate testing area, away from the development and production environment for the
product. Developers review the feedback and fix identified problems, updating the components for
retesting.
5.
Deployment: During the deployment stage, the product is released for customer or stakeholder use. Some
testing is also completed in the production environment, which now houses the new product and the
approved, validated coding. Documentation on product use generally accompanies this release.
6.
Maintenance: The maintenance stage occurs after the product is deployed and is functioning within the
production environment, when intermittent patches and fixes may be needed to improve the usability of
the product. Additionally, any proposed enhancements may occur during this maintenance period.
Figure 4.7 The SDLC is a cyclical framework that defines the stages of software development, from its inception to its retirement,
providing a blueprint of the tasks to be completed for each stage of the cycle. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)
Agile Software Development
Organizations continue to identify efficiencies in the software development process and are increasingly using
124
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

the Agile methodology. Agile is an overarching term describing the iterative and incremental delivery of
quality products and value to stakeholders using team collaboration, flexibility, and continuous planning. Agile
software development is an adaptive approach to software development that considers uncertainty in
changing environments and allows “Agile” teams to respond to changes quickly by delivering smaller,
consumable work packages. The need for a software development approach that allowed for this flexibility,
value, and collaboration was identified by a group of like-minded individuals who created the Manifesto for
Agile Software Development, which features four Agile Manifesto values (Figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8 The Manifesto for Agile Software Development was created by seventeen like-minded software developers whose
combined thoughts and ideas led to the development of this adaptive approach to manage software development work. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
This approach emphasizes valuing certain aspects of software development over others:
•
Individuals’ interactions are valued over processes and tools. The Agile approach focuses on bringing the
right stakeholders together to find a solution. Collaboration is at the forefront of the development
process.
•
Working software is valued over comprehensive documentation. Although documentation is needed, the
end goal is a functioning system that meets the needs of the stakeholders with valued-added
documentation components. The documentation required should not get in the way of providing a
functional system.
•
Customer collaboration is valued over contract negotiation. Often with negotiations, one party feels like
the winner, while the other feels as if they lost. Agile software development utilizes collaboration
throughout the process to build a teamwork mentality to create the most value for the stakeholders.
•
Responding to change is valued over following a plan. Traditional development processes often follow a
rigid timeline where changes typically result in additional costs and delays. The Agile approach
incorporates changes into the planning process through evaluative feedback from stakeholders. This
often means that the timeline and plan evolve, and the development of the system evolves.
Historically, software development has been performed using the SDLC. This approach is very systematic and
is process oriented, moving from one stage to the next in the process. There are some parallels between the
two methods, however. Both SDLC and Agile software development involve planning documentation, feedback,
and testing of the system. With the Agile approach, however, there is much greater flexibility to incorporate
changes and end-user feedback at all points in the development process. The SDLC approach can be used with
any size project, whereas the Agile method is, at times, better suited for smaller-scale projects. With SDLC, no
changes are typically made after the initial stages, and there is little interaction with the end user (customer).
In contrast, end users are consulted at regular intervals in the Agile approach. Finally, with SDLC, the project
moves through stages, whereas the Agile approach uses the term “phases” to better illustrate the fluid nature
of the process as the development progresses.
4.1 • Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
125

Imagine scaling up a point-of-sale (POS) system to accommodate the needs of a new boutique, opening both
an online storefront as well as a physical location. Fenner Street Boutique is set to open in the downtown area
of a midsize community that has invested in attracting unique shops for residents and visitors. The boutique
has a five-year goal to open a new location in a neighboring city with long-term plans for franchising. The POS
system will be used for inventory control and managing both the on-site and online sales. The Agile approach
would be particularly well-suited for such an application because there is uncertainty about the five-year goal
and the inventory that will be sold online and in the store. The Agile approach is more suited to accommodate
the uncertainty and will allow the business owner to incorporate needed adjustments as the business model
develops after opening. The business owner will be involved in the development and share crucial information
with the team about how the POS system will be used now and in the future. The process allows for the speed,
flexibility, and creativity that is needed for growing business.
The main tenets of the Agile Manifesto hold value for applications beyond simply software development. The
Agile framework has migrated to a wide variety of applications in business development, including marketing,
finance, and human resources.
How Does Agile Development Work?
Although the Agile approach’s process may seem unclear in its flexibility, there are central components of the
development process that are key to success. Rather than stages or steps, the components can be best viewed
as phases.
•
A first step in the development process involves planning and preparation to bring together the right
individuals to work on the team. This team might also include key stakeholders from the organization to
ensure their input is at the forefront of the systems development, as illustrated in Figure 4.9.
•
An assembled Agile team, consisting of a small group of individuals assigned to the same project or
product, creates the plan for completing the identified requirements and a final product. The team
identifies the features that will make up the final product and the order in which these features will be
delivered. These features are referred to as the product backlog (or road map).
•
After the product backlog is established, the work of developing the software begins.
•
Regular meetings with the Agile team and the product owner are held to gauge the status of work in
progress. User stories are the functional components of the work that are defined in conjunction with the
product owner or stakeholder. Each of these stories is expected to add to the completed final product.
Figure 4.9 shows the continuous evaluative nature of the Agile approach. The system that is eventually
launched is developed with stakeholder input, reevaluation, and adjusting as necessary to provide a solution
to meet the needs of the product owner.
126
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

Figure 4.9 An Agile team manages the planning and prioritization of work to be undertaken toward a completed product, generally
within a 1–4-week iteration. (credit: modification of work by Pietro Casanova, “Agile Processes: A Unifying Approach for the Future of
Projects” (paper presented at PMI® Global Congress 2013 --EMEA, Istanbul, Turkey, April 24, 2013), Project Management Institute.
https://www.pmi.org/learning/library/agile-approach-projects-market-globalization-5777)
CAREERS IN IS
Agile Project Manager
Agile project managers lead Agile teams and deliver projects using the Agile methodology. Managing
projects with an Agile method differs from traditionally managed projects as the Agile project manager
guides the team through dynamic, fast-changing, and sometimes volatile environments with a good deal of
uncertainty to achieve project targets. The skills required for this role include excellent communication and
organizational skills, effective critical-thinking, the ability to work well within a team environment, and a
strong understanding of Agile and project management processes. These positions can be found in a
variety of organizations but are generally housed in IS departments.
Another element of Agile project management is sprint planning. A sprint is a time-based period, generally
between 1 and 6 weeks, that represents a delivery cycle during which the specified work is completed and
reviewed. During these sprints, the team will have a daily meeting, often called a stand-up, generally between
ten and thirty minutes, to discuss progress made and challenges encountered. The team will also discuss the
design needs of the work, which may occur before or during the first sprint. Additionally, teams will break
down large tasks into subtasks for each sprint. For each sprint, an Agile team identifies, based on the skills of
its team members, the user stories it will work on during the sprint, and it estimates the time required for
completion. For example, the team may decide on a two-week sprint, aiming to complete two coding tasks,
two testing tasks, and two documentation tasks. After this, the user stories are prioritized accordingly.
During the sprint, the team members will actively work on their assigned tasks and resolve any issues needing
to be addressed. When an issue arises during sprints, it is added to the backlog and prioritized with the work
already maintained in the backlog. At the completion of each sprint, the team generally has a usable and
workable product, ready for the stakeholder or product owner to review during a sprint review meeting. Teams
may be able to see the amount of work remaining through the use of a burndown chart, or a graphical
representation of the work completed in a sprint and the work remaining over time. The team has a postsprint
review to identify challenges and opportunities for the next sprint cycle. This process continues until the
4.1 • Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
127

backlog of work is depleted and the functional components of the product are completed. Once the backlog of
items has been addressed, the team will hold a retrospective meeting where members will discuss the
sprints in detail and areas of improvement to apply to future sprints.
Advantages and Disadvantages of SDLC and Agile Software
Development
In determining how to approach systems analysis, the advantages and disadvantages of SDLC and Agile
should be considered. Some aspects of the processes might be better suited for specific types of projects,
while others may not. The flexibility required in the nature of today’s business world and how businesses
operate might require a hybrid approach to software development that includes aspects from both SDLC and
Agile.
The structure in the SDLC approach can offer projects rigor, detailed documentation, a thorough examination
of the risks and pitfalls in a design, and careful attention to budgetary considerations. However, SDLC is not
designed for projects with a good deal of uncertainty in the beginning stages, nor is it suitable for projects in
which unexpected changes might come up. This is where Agile software development’s more fluid approach
can be beneficial. Through a more iterative approach and with close collaboration with end users, the design
can be clarified, key stakeholders can be involved, and unexpected issues can be systematically tackled. Agile
has been criticized for its lack of detailed documentation and the unpredictable costs that can result from its
focus on speed and flexibility. But by using a hybrid approach, organizations can mitigate these weaknesses
and utilize the strengths of each approach to meet their needs.
Consider the scenario of developing the POS system for Fenner Street Boutique to see how the hybrid
approach works in practice. With the ribbon cutting and website launch already scheduled, the business owner
faces a tight deadline and is particularly concerned about staying within budget. Because the POS system will
be crucial for inventory control, it needs to be up and running before the store opens. The SDLC approach
helps by providing clear deadlines and documentation, ensuring the system is scalable for future growth, and
keeping budget considerations in mind. On the other hand, the Agile approach allows the owner to stay
involved throughout the process and adapt as needed, such as adding the finalized logo once it’s ready.
Furthermore, as the owner is still deciding on the final inventory for both in-store and online items (including
potential “online exclusive” products), there are uncertainties to address. Agile software development is ideal
for handling such flexibility, giving the business owner a voice throughout the development process. In sum,
SDLC offers the structure necessary to meet deadlines and budgets, while Agile allows the business the
flexibility to make decisions as its vision evolves.
Roles and Responsibilities of the Analysis and Design Teams
Analysis and design teams may consist of several members using various tools and methods to create design-
related solutions, such as designing a mobile application, building a website, or any other design effort. The
size of the team will vary, as will its structure—from centralized design teams with hierarchical organization to
flexible teams of contract resources. Both structure and size will be determined by the scope of the effort and
the types of expertise needed. Table 4.1 lists the roles found on an analysis and design team.
128
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

Role
Responsibilities
Designer
In the early stage of software development, a designer creates and tests software solutions
to improve on an existing system or to develop a new one. Designers may assume a general
role on the team or may have a specialized role such as a product, visual (user interface), or
user experience designer.
Systems
architect
Systems architects are responsible for the technological and management aspects of the
design; creating the hardware, software, and network systems; and working within
multidisciplinary teams of experts to grasp the big picture.
User
experience
(UX)
researcher
UX researchers conduct user testing to validate ideas slated for the design, collect user data,
and track stakeholder feedback. This team member’s responsibilities extend to gaining an
understanding of user behaviors, needs, and motivations via focus groups, surveys, and
interviews to evaluate how users make use of the design solution.
Systems
analyst
These professionals’ primary function is to detail the technical specifications of the system
and lend their IT backgrounds to the technical needs of the team.
Table 4.1 Analysis and Design Team Roles and Responsibilities The members of an analysis and design team vary by organization
and by project. These are common members and roles.
LINK TO LEARNING
There are many approaches to completing a feasibility study, which is an assessment of a proposed project
or business venture that aims to understand its strengths and weaknesses and explores its technical,
market, operational, and financial fitness. Suppose you are hired as a consulting systems analyst to provide
services for a financial institution that is interested in expanding services into a neighboring state. It may be
easy to assume that the feasibility study should have more of a financial focus than a technical one, but
other areas of consideration (such as operational, environmental, legal) are important and can impact final
decision making. Read this article providing some insight into how to create a feasibility study
(https://openstax.org/r/109FeasbltyStdy) to learn more.
4.2 Defining the Business Problem and User Requirements
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain how to determine a business problem
•
Identify the tools and techniques used to define user requirements
•
Describe the consequences of incomplete or incorrect user requirements
•
Apply what you have learned about defining a business problem and user requirements
Businesses are often challenged with finding solutions to problems affecting their operations, and such
challenges can influence the overall health of the organization. Some problems are easily identifiable and
readily avail themselves (such as an assembly line failure), while others require a more intricate analysis of the
problem (declining membership, for example). In either case, before beginning any problem-solving process, it
is important for a business to determine the exact nature of the problem it is experiencing and the extent to
which the problem’s effects have spread through the organization.
4.2 • Defining the Business Problem and User Requirements
129

How to Determine a Business Problem
A business problem is any obstacle to business operations that causes variance in the expected outcome.
These variances can have a significant impact on an organization’s bottom line, affecting its ability to maintain
healthy operations and sustain itself among its competitors. While variance or some level of uncertainty is
expected in business, when variances occur, business leaders need to know how to effectively address them.
Consider the scenario that occurred during a busy holiday season in 2013, when the CIO of Target was made
aware by the company’s security team of a security breach of its POS terminals in which the credit card
information of customers was being compromised.2 Let’s suppose you are the CIO of a major corporation, and
its network security is threatened by sophisticated malware. How do you determine a business problem, the
extent of its impact, and the possible solutions that are timely, feasible, and responsive to the problem? You
need to follow these steps to define the problem, determine and then implement solutions, and evaluate how
the solution worked.
1.
Define the problem: Defining the problem can be as simple as starting with general questions to further
explore the situation. Asking questions may elicit or uncover the general problem and may help you to
think through the problem from a critical lens. The “five whys” refers to an iterative interrogative
technique that can be used to explore the cause-and-effect relationships underlying a particular problem,
and it is an example of how to approach the process of defining the problem by asking questions. The
technique was invented by the founder of Toyota nearly a hundred years ago, gained popularity in the
1970s, and is still used today to solve problems. The idea behind the technique is that asking questions
may help you gain a deeper understanding of a problem. An opening question might be “Why is that a
problem?” “Why did it happen that way?” or “Why did it happen now?” Subsequent questions are then
posed to help further your understanding of the problem, such as: “What areas of the business is the
problem affecting?” and “What business roles or teams are impacted?” In theory, asking continuous “why”
questions to dig further into an issue should help to identify the problem by the fifth “why.” To add further
value, organizations may use techniques like this to engage the help of employees, stakeholders, and
others in defining the problem, which can lead to a more thorough and effective evaluation process,
provide individual value to team members, and result in an effective resolution—all means by which the
business can build opportunities for its success.
2.
Determine possible solutions: Once there is a good understanding of the problem, the process of
determining possible solutions can begin. Using data collected when defining the problem plus the
insights gained from those participating in the process, brainstorm potential solutions that may solve the
problem. It is important to consider the “do nothing” option, along with its ramifications from a near- and
long-term planning perspective. The solutions should consider cost, impact, time, resources, and other
factors that qualify their viability as options.
3.
Assess, select, and implement a solution: Review the options presented and weigh the pros and cons of
each. For example, suppose the organization depends on a preferred piece of hardware that is delayed
with an international supplier. Should hardware be replaced with a lower-cost, regional option that may
not be as reliable, or should the organization wait for the supply to come in? The cost of waiting for the
preferred hardware may be significant, but the regional part may pose a quality risk, causing the
organization to make amends to save the relationship. The organization should select and implement the
option that is the most feasible and viable the—one that delivers the most benefits with minimal
disruption.
4.
Evaluate the solution: How well did it work? When a solution succeeds, it is common to apply that solution
to similar problems. But for those solutions that do not work out well, the process of defining the problem
may need to be restarted, and solution options may need to be reevaluated. A different option may be
selected to provide the desired result. As part of the closing process of a project, it is important to reflect
on opportunities for improvement and catalog best—as well as next—practices. The key is to avoid making
2
Kevin McCoy, “Target to Pay $18.5M for 2013 Data Breach that Affected 41 Million Consumers,” USA Today, May 23, 2017,
https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2017/05/23/target-pay-185m-2013-data-breach-affected-consumers/102063932/
130
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

the same mistake more than once and building on the solution that was successful through broader and
deeper application.
Tools and Techniques Used to Identify User Requirements
Solving business problems requires understanding what is requested by the users or owners of the product/
service and needed to support their business functions. The user requirements are aspects of a solution that
are specified by stakeholders and needed to support specific needs and expectations of a business process or
product. For example, in seeking a Human Resources Information System (HRIS), the users of this system (HR
managers, HR support staff, organizational employees) may request features to manage hiring, employee
performance evaluations, payroll, and employee benefits. User requirements are often recorded in
specification documentation and can be further categorized as either functional or nonfunctional
requirements.
A functional requirement is the feature or function of an application that is needed for the affected business
area to accomplish its tasks. These may include business rules, transactions, administrative functions, audit,
authentication, authorizations to external interfaces, and reporting functions. With respect to the HRIS
example, a functional requirement may be a simple search function that involves using an ID number to
search for an employee and, if found, returns results relating to that employee.
A nonfunctional requirement is an attribute of the system that enhances its functionality or operation.
Nonfunctional requirements are often viewed as those items that describe the general properties of the
system or how the system should behave and work. These may include performance, scalability, security,
flexibility, operating constraints, usability, interoperability, maintainability, availability, and capacity. In the
hiring example, HR managers would require that the HRIS system is secure from vulnerabilities and threats.
They would also require that payroll runs smoothly and adjusts accurately for yearly tax updates, rates, and
withholdings. All of these are nonfunctional requirements.
Requirements are generally determined by a team of individuals including stakeholder users, analysts, and/or
IS team members with general knowledge and expertise about the system being designed or modified.
Administering user observations, interviews, cross-functional meetings, questionnaires or surveys,
documentation analysis, brainstorming, and interface analyses are methods used to elicit requirements needs
from these individuals.
One means of storing this information is a requirements traceability matrix (RTM). Generally a spreadsheet
or similar, the RTM is used to record each requirement along with supplemental information, such as its type
(functional/nonfunctional), description, objective, business need/justification, priority, department, and the
status of its development. Many organizations also use this document as a testing reference to ensure each
requirement has been thoroughly reviewed, tested, and confirmed. In addition, the RTM helps with the
verification and validation of the requirements/needs and wants analysis.
Another tool used in gathering user requirements is a design diagram, which is a simplistic drawing or
elaborate depiction that helps design teams as it is simple to understand, universally accepted, and easy to
compare. It plays an important role in design presentations as they allow viewers to visualize systems,
structures, and the relationships between them. There are, however disadvantages of design diagrams,
including the time involved in creating them. Consultation with other stakeholders or further research may be
needed to complete the design diagram, causing it to be a time-consuming process. As more specialized
design software programs become available, design diagrams can be costly. Moreover, they can be misleading,
inaccurate, biased, or confusing if they have been conceived incorrectly or are purposefully minimizing or
highlighting certain aspects.
Some design diagrams can be generally categorized as maps, charts, or graphs, while others are specific in
type and can provide a specific view of the data being presented. Some examples include:
4.2 • Defining the Business Problem and User Requirements
131

•
A flowchart is a diagram that displays sequential relationships between data, systems, programs, or
processes. They are often used by technical and nontechnical persons to document, plan, and
communicate ideas in a simple-to-understand visual format. Flowcharts utilize specific symbols,
diagrammatic arrows, and connectors to aid in the visualization.
•
User stories are explanations from the user perspective, usually written in an informal format, of specific
systems functions. The components of user stories are referred to as the 3 Cs: cards (the user role, general
task, and goal to be achieved), conversation (discussion with the development team in which users gain
clarity about the user requirements), and confirmation (agreed-on acceptance criteria for satisfying the
user requirements).
•
An As-Is/To-Be process map details the “current state” and “future state,” respectively, of a specific
process or function within an information system. The As-Is process map details how things currently
work, while the To-Be process map describes what should be done to reach the desired future state.
•
A use case diagram is also a visual representation of system features that displays how specific users
interact with the specific functions of a system. These diagrams usually contain the following components:
actors (human or any external entity), a box representing the system itself, and directional arrows that
show the relationships between the actors and the systems that indicate the flow of data, to and from the
system. Figure 4.10 shows a use case diagram depicting the system setup of a boutique seeking to expand
by opening a brick-and-mortar store and online store that use the same system. Customers (actors) would
face different decisions based on where they were making a purchase. This diagram might be
accompanied by the written use case, which would include specifics about the account creation process
for an online purchase and the process for in-store transactions.
•
A context diagram is a high-level diagram that visualizes a system or parts of a system and the
environmental actors with which it interacts using diagrammatic arrows to display the flow of data. These
indicate the highest level of interaction between the system and business processes.
•
A mind map is a free-form depiction of ideas with branches displaying the flow of information and
thoughts, and they are generally used for brainstorming.
Figure 4.10 A use case diagram for a boutique would outline the various aspects of the system based on whether the customer was
an online customer or an in-store customer. (source: attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
LINK TO LEARNING
A business requirements document (BRD) is a formal guide that gathers all the aspects of the business
needs and details associated with a new project or program solution and its success, including the
objectives, expectations, and the reasons why the company is in need of a solution. The BRD will help guide
a team toward successful implementation of a solution that will meet the needs of the business. Review the
recommended components, and access template examples (https://openstax.org/r/109BusReqDoc) to learn
more about how to create a BRD.
132
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

Consequences of Incorrect or Incomplete User Requirements
The requirements-gathering process doesn’t always result in a perfect set of instructions to address the
business problem. Often, the RTM can be fraught with missing or incorrect user requirements, and this can
significantly impact the delivery of a final product and may cause challenges for the project team working to
deliver the product. Not only will there be associated costs (resources, regulatory penalties, delays to market),
but the impact may include undocumented processes, conflicting requirements, communication challenges
with end users, and a misguided focus on the visual aspects of the design instead of the functioning elements.
In the spirit of continuous improvement, systems analysts can iteratively address poor requirements by doing
the following:
1.
Do thorough research: Increase knowledge of the business problem by understanding the factors and
driving forces contributing to the business need. Research should focus on the context in which the
business exists and include both internal factors (like organizational culture and business processes) and
external factors (such as market conditions, regulatory requirements, and competitors). Ask: Are other
organizations experiencing the same business challenges or opportunities? What are other organizations
doing to address this? The research may validate or refute the gathered requirements, or identify new
requirements to consider.
2.
Revisit the business problem or opportunity: Once the research is completed, use the knowledge gathered
to revisit the business problem or opportunity. The situation may be viewed differently and can provide
additional insight. Is the business problem or opportunity what was envisioned? Can the business problem
or opportunity be spoken about more confidently to support the team? Can insights be offered that may
support a more comprehensive requirements document?
3.
Conduct requirements review sessions: Initiate sessions to review the requirements with all stakeholders.
Feedback from these sessions may elicit additional valuable input. Be sure to include visuals in the review
sessions (data maps, flowcharts, diagrams, reports) as they can often convey information with greater
clarity.
4.
Seek approval: Final review and approval from stakeholders and business owners may prove useful in
addressing incomplete or missing requirements as well as validating the requirements gathered.
Consider how the requirements gathering process might be applied to establishing intramural competitions at
a university, which are often student-led initiatives. A student has been assigned responsibility for their
college’s intramural sports leagues throughout the year. This involves setting up team registration, recording
payments, keeping track of scores, setting up tournaments, and reserving space on campus for games. The
leagues have been getting more popular and the old way of managing the process is no longer as effective. A
faster, electronic process is needed. Also, as students graduate, there needs to be a plan in place to train and
transition to a new manager. Having an app or similar type of system to manage the aspects of the league
would be helpful. The students would need to get help from both the IT and athletics departments. It would
also be important to get feedback from team captains or coaches as to whether they would use the app to
register teams and track their progress through the season. Some tools that might be useful include a design
diagram and a flowchart. The flowchart can be used to show how a team will work its way through the system
as the league progresses to the eventual championship tournament game. Finally, a key consideration is cost.
There is a very limited budget to develop the application, so it would be ideal to be able to access existing
technologies in use at the college. These are just some of the considerations when designing the intramural
app and how key stakeholder input can be incorporated into the final product.
GLOBAL CONNECTIONS
Requirements Gathering in Globally Dispersed Teams
It is increasingly common for organizations to operate globally, with teams and services dispersed
4.2 • Defining the Business Problem and User Requirements
133

internationally. When teams are spread globally in different locations, it may complicate the requirements
gathering and software development processes, leading to inefficiencies and cost overruns. Often,
organizations may opt for Global Software Development (GSD) services. These services enable
knowledgeable workers in various parts of the world to develop software solutions for organizations. Unlike
traditional teams where individuals are colocated and tasks and activities are distributed to achieve a
common goal, GSD teams are virtual and rely heavily on communication technologies to develop software.
There are some challenges associated with GSD services, such as lower productivity and challenges in
communication. To ensure that the GSD process is effective, coordination across virtual teams and project
leaders is needed.
Defining a Business Problem and Determining User Requirements: Case
Study
Dr. Singh has had a thriving medical practice, Hometown Physicians Group, for several years and is looking to
expand her practice by opening another location in a neighboring town within the next six months. Dr. Singh is
concerned that her current practice is fraught with challenges that she does not want to carry over to the new
practice location. These challenges include manual billing and accounting practices; the use of multiple
operating systems, hardware, and software systems; lack of security as staff use personal devices to record
patient visit information; and older patient records in paper files. Many of these challenges can be resolved
with a new electronic health record (EHR) system. Such a system could also help ensure the office is in
compliance with medical privacy regulations and using it may improve the practice’s compliance with industry
regulations. Lastly, Dr. Singh would like her patients to be seen in either office.
Additional information about Hometown Physicians Group:
•
There are twenty-five additional employees, including clinicians (doctors, nurses, and medical assistants)
and support staff (billing and accounting, practice management, and reception).
•
The office must upgrade to a new EHR as the relationship with the old one will be ending in six months.
•
The transporting of manual files between offices needs to be eliminated, as does the practice of using
personal devices for patient recordkeeping.
Assume the role of the designer and user experience researcher in this scenario. Recall the designer’s role is to
provide guidance in the early stages about the system that will meet the business needs. The user experience
researcher is focused on making sure the system design meets the needs of the stakeholders—in this case
study, Dr. Singh and her associates. Think about the process to accurately define the problem and which tools
could be used to visualize the problem and the system for Hometown Physicians Group. You might consider
whether there are other key stakeholders who might be important to include in the conversation. Consider the
following as you work through the design process:
•
How would you approach the requirements gathering process?
•
Who are the stakeholders involved and how would you engage them in the analysis?
•
What tools would you use to understand the business processes and the opportunity presented?
•
What questions would you like to ask Dr. Singh that would assist you in your work?
Let’s begin by defining the business problem. Keep in mind that the circumstances do not need to always be
problematic. Instead, as is the case here, Dr. Singh has a new opportunity to expand the practice. This
opportunity might involve some challenges, but sometimes the use of the words “business problem” implies a
negative situation, whereas this expansion is positive. Dr. Singh has provided initial information to give context
to the existing issues in the office’s current operations and how they may present additional challenges in the
new business model. Begin with the five-whys method or other appropriate questions. For example, you might
ask why the current billing system is a challenge for the office staff. You can also probe into how the different
operating systems currently present issues.
134
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

In addition, it would be important to engage Dr. Singh in a conversation about the other stakeholders who
need to be included in the initial design stages, and in the testing and evaluation phases of the project. This
could be done through a requirements review session. During these initial stages, tools such as the RTM,
flowcharts, and use case diagrams could help you visualize the overall business problem and the system
requirements. Moreover, it could be helpful to use a design diagram to show Dr. Singh how the current system
functions and the relationships that currently exist.
Once you feel confident in the business problem definition, move on to the next stage of determining possible
solutions. During this phase, you can continue engaging with Dr. Singh and the office associates and utilizing
some of the tools mentioned. You will want to address the user requirements (functional and nonfunctional) in
the proposed solutions. Try to offer a couple of solutions, and for each be sure to include information such as
cost factors, time, and training required to implement the solution. This is a good time to revisit the RTM to
ensure that the proposed solutions meet the needs and wants of the practice. You could also consider creating
a new design diagram to show how the proposed solutions differ from the existing system.
Next, the project would move on to the selection and implementation phase. During this stage of the process,
the proposed solutions are evaluated, and a final solution is selected. It is helpful to generate a pros and cons
list for each and to engage the key stakeholders in the conversation. Ultimately, you should implement the
option that is the most feasible and viable for the office, one that gains the most benefits with minimal
disruption.
The final phase is to evaluate the solution. This phase is likely to not have a specific endpoint. You might
deploy tools for Dr. Singh to evaluate the functioning of the system on her own. But initially, the design team
will want to evaluate how the system functions to meet the user requirements and the needs of the office
during the transition. As the users interact with the system, it is likely that the need for improvements or
changes will arise. You might consider establishing a process by which these system changes and
improvements can be communicated to the design team. The feedback could be provided as the issues arise
or be compiled and shared with the team on a regularly scheduled basis, such as quarterly. The goal is that
once the system is operational, feedback from the users is solicited to evaluate the efficacy of the system in
meeting the needs of the medical office. This evaluation stage is crucial and should reflect back on the
business need that was identified in the early stages of the project.
This case study provides a general framework and some factors you might consider as you work to develop
your solution to this problem. You might have other ideas on how to approach the problem, uncover user
requirements, and produce creative solutions.
CAREERS IN IS
Analyst
Analysts are the most common professionals engaged in defining the business problem or opportunity as
well as leading or managing the requirements gathering process. This position’s title has many variations,
including business systems analysts, systems analysts, and different versions of software engineers. These
roles can be found in all areas of a company, including IT departments. Common skills required for these
roles include being knowledgeable about business analysis, communication, requirements gathering,
analytics, and software (Microsoft, Azure, Python, R) or tools used for documentation. Higher-level
educational degrees, certifications, and experience will contribute to higher salary earnings.
4.2 • Defining the Business Problem and User Requirements
135

4.3 Technical Design Methodologies and Practical Applications
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain systems design principles and networked architecture
•
Identify systems designs for enterprise network architectures
The launch of a new company, or the decision to expand an existing business into a new area, are
organizational shifts that require new systems. The design of those systems, and their architecture needs, will
be most successful when planned using established design principles and best practices. Consider Dr. Singh
and the medical office expansion of Hometown Physicians Group. The addition of the new office with the new
billing and electronic records system has worked out well. Both offices are functioning as expected, patients
can be seen in either location, and patient records comply with current electronic reporting requirements. As
part of an outreach effort, Dr. Singh is considering adding a monthly walk-in clinic for vaccinations at the local
community center. This would further complicate the system that is currently in place as it is not set up to track
nonpatients or to accept government-sponsored health-care programs. The latter capability would need to be
addressed and incorporated into the system as the practice can be reimbursed for some expenses through the
government-sponsored health-care program. One additional complication is that the program requires specific
reports and data to be submitted quarterly through the state health-care program portal.
With these capabilities, Hometown Physicians Group would provide an important service to the community,
serve as a source of clinical hours for those studying to be health-care professionals, and contribute to a
health-care issue that Dr. Singh is passionate about. To accommodate this new venture, the current system will
require additional design work.
System Design Principles and Networked Architectures
After gaining an understanding of the business problem, completing a systems analysis, gathering user
requirements, and generating design diagrams to potentially address an organization’s business opportunity,
it is time to begin the next phase. The system design process determines and defines the architecture,
interfaces, and data for a system that can satisfy the specified requirements. There are several general guiding
principles that govern good system design, including:
•
Simplicity: Simplifying the design and system solution is preferred as overcomplication can require more
work, time, and sometimes leads to solving problems that do not exist.
•
Clarity: Designs should be clear and easy to use. Be mindful of users who will interact with the product.
What type of experience would an end user want to have while using the product? Avoid or minimize
complexity where possible.
•
Core functionality: The main or core functionality and its interrelated parts are the most important.
Additional system features and details can wait.
•
Scalability: Does the solution have the capacity to respond to organizational change—that is, handle
additions or reductions of users, clients, products, processes, services, data, as well as an evolving
business landscape? Where does the company want to be in the next few years, and how would that
impact scalability needs? These considerations should be appropriately addressed within the solution to
minimize any constraints on organizational change.
•
Reliability: The design and system solution should be reliable when it functions in accordance with its
designed specifications, with no or minimal failures during the specified time of its use.
•
Security: How secure is the system from external or unauthorized use or threats? A system is deemed
secure when authorized users can access it and when all measures to control and safeguard the system
are in place.
136
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

ETHICS IN IS
ACM Code of Ethics
All those involved with the systems analysis and design team are expected to maintain ethical standards to
facilitate a relationship of trust with the customer. There are eight principles focused on the following:
public, client and employer, product, judgment, management, profession, colleagues, and self. These
principles were designed to guide decision-making for computing professionals, with a focus on integrity in
decision-making and advancing the public good. Just as other professionals such as attorneys and doctors
have codes of ethics to protect clients and patients, the ACM code of ethics was established for computing
professionals to avoid unjust harm, promote honesty and fairness, and respective privacy to protect
customers.
You can find a full description of the Software Engineering Code—ACM Code of Ethics and Professional
Conduct (https://openstax.org/r/109ACMcode) at the Association for Computing Machinery’s website.
Network architecture is concerned with the fundamental principles and concepts that underlie the design and
operation of a network. The network architecture is a top-level view of the system that defines the
equipment in the network and the interaction between the equipment . For example, in your home you might
have a printer connected to a network/LAN or the internet. In this case, the network architecture includes your
computer/laptop, the printer, the modem, and the router. It could include additional equipment, such as
Bluetooth devices or your mobile phone.
The network design, in contrast focuses on the specific implementation and configuration of a network to
meet the requirements of a particular organization or application. Network designs can be created using
various types of design models and tools. These may include logical and physical designs, prototype designs,
or computerized system designs.
Logical and Physical Designs
Designs of systems can be logical or physical, and as these designs are developed, it is important to clearly
represent the information presented in both. A logical design illustrates how data is logically presented and
flows through the designed system. The focus of logical designs is not on the physical attributes of the design,
but on the business needs of the organization and the information gathered from stakeholders about the
business problem or opportunity. Logical designs incorporate the business processes needed to visually
represent these activities, the flow of data, and the relationships between them—all of which will be later used
to create the physical design.
The goal of logical design is to create a high-level representation that is independent of any specific software
product. Logical designs can take many forms. One is the entity relationship diagram (ERD), which is a
structural diagram used in logical database design that serves as a visual representation of the data flow and
its relationship among people, objects, events, places, or concepts. ERD models are composed of entities
(something that is definite and uniquely exists, such as a business, college course, or person), attributes
(characteristics or traits of an entity), and relationships (interactions between two or more entities).
For example, Figure 4.11 shows an ERD of a doctor’s office. Entities are uniquely identified in rectangular
boxes—physician treats patient, physician orders treatment, physician refers to specialist, facility treats
patient, and so on—and directional lines with symbols represent the relationship of the connecting entities.
4.3 • Technical Design Methodologies and Practical Applications
137

Figure 4.11 An entity relationship diagram provides a visual representation of a system or process, allowing users to see
relationships between entities and their attributes. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
An additional output of the logical design may be the data dictionary, which details the category names and
supporting properties of the data used in the database. The dictionary is usually organized in table format,
and the general properties for the table may include the column name, contents, number/type of characters,
required/mandatory indicator, and any other aspects of the data that support the logical design.
A physical design utilizes the completed logical design to create a concrete, physical system with specific
hardware and software components, detailed systems diagrams and layout, and the requirements for each
component. Physical designs allow teams to visualize the physical structure of the system and its supporting
components and characteristics. During the physical design phase, the data gathered during the logical design
phase are input into the tables, columns, indexes, and places where further details can be added. The physical
design can be built to optimize query performance, data maintenance, or whatever functions the business
needs.
CAREERS IN IS
Systems Designers
Systems designers are specialized professionals who support the analysis and design of information
systems. These roles require having technical and analytical knowledge, expertise with software or tools
used for documentation, and also possessing communication, leadership, and problem-solving skills.
Systems designer roles are generally found in IT departments—with higher-level educational degrees,
certifications, and experience contributing to higher salary earnings. Job titles with similar career paths
include systems/computer engineer, IS specialist, and software developer. If you are interested in additional
information about a career as a systems designer, you can check out the Indeed (https://openstax.org/r/
109IndeedCareer) career guide.
The Data Cycle
The data cycle refers to the different stages that data undergo while they exists in an organization’s system,
from its initial generation onward.
•
Creation: During the creation stage, the team addresses the different methods by and inputs through
which data are created or captured. Data may exist in different formats—such as Microsoft Word, PDF, and
SQL—and it is important to identify these data types in considering how to manage this data. For example,
your data may enter the data cycle via manual entry wherein authorized users input information directly
138
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

into the system. Data may also be captured through an import mechanism from an external source. This
method is widely used in organizational acquisitions and transitions to maintain the historical components
of data and to continue current business processes. The capture may also be generated from other input
sources or devices used throughout the organization.
•
Storage: Once the data have been created or captured within the system, they need to be stored for future
retrieval, use, and reference. The security of the data along with backup and recovery functions are
needed to ensure the data are secured and retained for the organization’s use.
•
Use: The data usage stage provides an understanding of how the data are used to support business
functions. How are the data processed, modified, and saved? Where is the audit trail of data manipulation,
and how should it be maintained?
•
Sharing: The sharing of system data is another key aspect of the data cycle. The data should be made
available so it can be shared internally (in which case, it could include reporting and data analysis
purposes) and externally (in which case, it might include sharing data for regulatory reporting
requirements).
•
Archival: Data archival is the process of transferring data to a nonactive environment for storage, a
location other than where the system’s daily use environment exists.
•
Destruction: Data destruction is needed as data grows to a volume that is no longer feasible to maintain.
Generally, the destruction or purging of data occurs from the archival location, and every copy of the data
is removed within the guidelines of the organization’s regulatory retention period.
Prototype Designs
A prototype is a design approach wherein systems designers and users create a small-scale representation or
working model of the solution. Prototypes are generally created using an iterative development process, or a
series of continuous planning analysis, implementation, and evaluation steps that lead to a design that has
increasing functionality and increasingly meets the user requirements. Prototypes also enable users to modify
or make interim changes through to the completion of the final product. In addition to the flexibility that
prototypes offer, their other benefits include:
•
early detection of functional problems
•
increased user participation, engagement, and team collaboration
•
increased satisfaction with the final product
•
greater savings of time and money associated with rework
Creating a prototype does, however, have its drawbacks. Prototypes can be costly to complete and time-
consuming to develop. Often, the features included may differ from the final product, and this can be
misleading for the stakeholder as it does not provide an end-to-end functioning product. Prototype
development also lends itself to rework due to changing business requirements.
Computerized System Design
Use of computers to assist in the design process, including the creation, development, modification, or
optimization of design systems is called computer-aided design (CAD). Sometimes called computerized
system design, CAD is increasingly used to optimize resources and maximize time to delivery. Designers,
engineers, and other technical resources frequently utilize CAD in situations where its ease of visualization,
level of detail, capacity for specialization, and ability to optimize products and render a physical product can
assist in the design process.
Input/Output Control
In information systems, input/output control falls under the systems design process. An input is the raw data
that are processed through the functions of the system. Inputs are controlled by the directives used to submit
responses into the system by the user, producing an output according to the system logic. Systems designers
create input forms and screens that have quality considerations and that focus on the user experience. These
4.3 • Technical Design Methodologies and Practical Applications
139

considerations should provide users with the ability to move about the screen to different fields, confirm the
accuracy of data entered, and capture the necessary data according to the requirements of its intended use. In
Figure 4.12, the inputs of the hiring system (such as résumés and recommendations) are processed according
to the system’s logic into an output format (a decision to hire a candidate). The outputs are synthesized
through the feedback loop to enhance the hiring process. For example, job performance and satisfaction data
are fed back into the system to better analyze potential candidates based on the likelihood of performing well
and being satisfied with their job. Certain demographics and experiences as found on the submitted résumés
might show a trend in terms of performance and satisfaction. The feedback provided through the system can
then be used to better filter potential job candidates and increase the hiring efficiency and possibly reduce
turnover.
An output is the information the system delivers to users—in other words, it is the data resulting from the
inputs being processed according to the system logic. System designers consider several factors that meet the
user requirements. The outputs need to be the right output, quantity, speed, and accuracy. In the hiring
example, the output from the system is a candidate to fill the open job position. Other outputs from the
system are job performance and satisfaction metrics.
Figure 4.12 The inputs of the hiring system are processed according to the system’s logic into an output format. This is a continuous
process as new inputs are added to the system for processing. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)
Systems Design Task List
A systems design task list provides a road map through each step of the design process, allowing teams to
have an organized workflow and make informed decisions at each step. A well-crafted design system improves
the efficiency of teams and improves the speed of product delivery. These guidelines walk through the steps
for creating a systems design task list:
1.
Define and document design processes: Create clear and concise documentation defining the guidelines
for system behaviors, standards, attributes, accessibility, and any other relevant information to ensure the
design is user friendly and sets team expectations for the end product. Identify the technologies, system
elements, and physical interfaces that will comprise the new system. Document the strategy to include a
review of the user requirements for the system functionality.
2.
Identify design characteristics: Define the architectural components relating to the system, ensuring they
are able to be implemented. Create a shared language and vocabulary—for example, words, behaviors,
images, phrases—to ensure consistency with the design elements as well as consistency within the team’s
shared experience in creating a unified user experience. Define and document the design characteristics
for each identified component.
3.
Assess alternative design options and finalize design decisions: Evaluate alternate design options based
on similar, parallel, or new developments in theory and practice that may be feasible to implement as an
140
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

alternative to the identified system. Be sure to include those components at risk of becoming obsolete as
the system is being built. Document the rationale for all options presented. Finalize and document the
agreed-upon solution to include major hardware, software components, interfaces, subsystems, and
dependencies. Revisit the preceding steps and adjust documentation as needed.
4.
Build and manage the design: Design the solution to include major hardware, software components,
interfaces, subsystems, and dependencies. Ensure that accessibility and inclusivity standards are included.
5.
Review and implement the system design: Review the system design to ensure it meets the approved user
requirements, engaging system owners, users, designers, and other stakeholders in the review process.
Provide training for all users and system support staff to ensure proper use, support, and maintenance.
6.
Measure the success of the design system and continue making improvements: Capture user feedback
and evaluate the data received using metrics designed to measure its effectiveness and efficiency. Apply
continuous improvement processes to address user feedback and system updates and changes.
Systems Designs for Enterprise Network Architectures
The enterprise, a term used to refer to as a business, organization, or company, is composed of a technical
network or system of interconnected computers and other devices that allow for the exchange of data and
information (such as files) and the sharing of resources (such as printers). Users are connected through
devices and communicate via standard internet protocols. The enterprise network architecture refers to the
structure and layout of an organization’s network. Enterprise network architecture designs also reference
pertinent business functions and provide insight into the overall technical architecture for the business,
including the dependencies and connectivity of various applications. The goal of network architecture and its
supporting design is to identify the most efficient way to transfer data from one hardware point to the other.
Enterprise network architectures are composed of communication protocols along with local area and wide
area networks (LANs and WANs), network devices (routers, switches, storage), end endpoints (servers, mobile
devices).
There are several ways to design a network architecture, and selecting the right design should be based on the
goals and requirements of the network protocol, that is, the set of rules and guidelines that determine how
the data are exchanged between network devices. There are two broad types of network architecture: peer-to-
peer and client/server. In peer-to-peer (P2P) architecture, the computers on the network are all given the
same opportunity to use resources on the network. There is no central server for file storage, and network
resources are shared. With client/server architecture—otherwise known as tiered—there is a central
computer (server) that operates the network and allocates resources to the equipment connected to the
network.
A key characteristic of a peer-to-peer network architecture is its decentralized nature. As shown in Figure 4.13,
there is no central server through which the devices communicate directly. Each of the connected devices
assumes equal capabilities and responsibilities, hence the term peer. This type of architecture is often used for
smaller networks, like those in a home, and are highly resilient—even more than a centralized network—to the
compromise of threats.
4.3 • Technical Design Methodologies and Practical Applications
141

Figure 4.13 Each connected device in a peer-to-peer network assumes equal capabilities and responsibilities, and there is no central
server supporting direct device communication. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
As shown in Figure 4.14, a client/server network is composed of servers and connected client machines—and
thus considered a centralized network. Servers provide services—generally client requests—through their vast
processing power. Client/server networks are associated with larger, more extensive computer networks
utilizing WANs.
Figure 4.14 Client/server architecture is a centralized network composed of servers and connected client machines. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
GLOBAL CONNECTIONS
5G Technology’s Global Reach
The fifth generation mobile network, or 5G, is the latest iteration of a global wireless standard. This 5G
technology connects people, places, and things, including devices, machines, and objects. It provides
increased availability, reliability, and network capacity, allowing for quicker service delivery to users.
Increased network capacity allows for the maximum amount of information to be transferred at any given
time and considers volume, traffic, utilization, and type of data. 5G became available in 2019 when most
phone manufacturers began using the technology commercially. It is widely expected to expand beyond
the sixty plus countries currently benefiting from the service, and it is also expected to extend beyond the
mobile device industry, spreading into the automotive sector and others as well.
142
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

4.4 Designing for Mobile Devices and Other Design Considerations
Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:
•
Explain user-centered design
•
Identify special design considerations for mobile apps and social platforms
Designing mobile applications and social media platforms focuses on creating intuitive and engaging
experiences by placing the user’s needs, preferences, and behaviors at the center of the design process.
Keeping users in mind ensures that apps and platforms are not only functional but also provide seamless and
enjoyable experiences across different devices and user contexts.
User-Centered Design
Businesses increasingly recognize the need to incorporate stakeholder feedback into the design process,
which reflects a shift from traditional design and development practices. A way to meet this need is to
incorporate user-centered design (UCD), an iterative, or stepwise, approach to development that considers
the user’s needs, behaviors, and preferences. UCD aims to positively influence user experience, gaining user
loyalty for continued use of the product. In short, the user is placed at the center of the design process and the
user’s experience is factored into decisions where the business looks to align business practices and
stakeholder research to create a design that aligns with the end user’s needs. Applying user feedback to guide
the design process not only strengthens the output of the design, but it creates a relationship with the user.
Consider some best practices for how to implement the UCD approach:
•
Define the business goal: To arrive at a final solution, businesses need to define their organizational goals.
These goals set the direction of the design process. What are the strategic goals of the business? What are
the targeted outcomes (in the short term or long term) of these goals? How will the design of the business
reflect these goals and increase its socioeconomic and financial value? How does the system user fit into
the strategic goals of the business and how will the system reflect that relationship? These decisions
should also consider the market forces that will help shape the design. Namely, the organization should
identify its target market, the intended users of its product/solution, and its competitors.
•
Understand users and align business goals: The customer is the driving force of the design as the
customers or end users will ultimately support the final solution. Therefore, having insight from the user’s
point of view is essential and foundational to UCD. This insight can include the user’s needs, abilities, and
constraints—each of which may impact a user’s ability to fully interact with an information system’s
design. Consider the task of designing a website for a client. To meet the needs of users who might have
specific challenges or differing abilities, the site might incorporate variable font size, color options, or
larger buttons. Anticipating the user’s tasks (current and future) is key for insight into the user’s abilities
and the challenges users might face when using the tool.
◦
Do thorough research. Initiate interviews, focus groups, surveys, and other types of customer research
methods to solicit user responses. Invite users who may provide insight into different roles or functions
of the design. Consider assessing who will use the website, the environment, how the user feels when
using the design, and their needs, abilities, and limitations. Gather and analyze the data using
analytical tools and analytics as the data will drive decisions for the design. Learn as much as possible
about the users in order to craft a product that fits their needs.
◦
Evaluate the business needs and requirements. Identify and engage stakeholders to further
understand your organization’s goals, constraints, regulatory requirements, and budget considerations.
Determine how to create the design and incorporate the data received from surveying users. Decide on
the metrics that will be used to measure the success of the design.
•
Generate the design solution and evaluate: Create a total solution that incorporates the user’s feedback.
Explore design tools for web design such as wireframes, user stories, mock-ups, and diagrams to provide
4.4 • Designing for Mobile Devices and Other Design Considerations
143

a vision of the full user story, leveraging business requirements and stakeholder feedback. Test the design
end to end, re-creating the user experience. This process lends itself to the iterative, or circular, nature of
UCD, namely, the cycling practice of building, refining, and improving a product, project, or initiative more
than once. Be sure to account for and validate all the business and user requirements. Evaluate the design
utilizing the identified metrics.
•
Continue to refine: Continue to involve the user throughout the design process, refining the design as
needed to assess its usability, a quality-related attribute that refers to a system or interface’s ease of use.
A popular social media platform, Instagram, provides an example of this iterative process. Launched in 2010,
Instagram provided a means for people to connect through photos and until 2012 was only available as an
iPhone app. The app grew in popularity, prompting the platform to evolve as users interacted with each other
and with the app itself. The first evolution was incorporating the hashtag (#). The hashtag was already in use
on X (at that time, Twitter) to cluster similar posts and provide a searching mechanism for similar content.
Another addition was integrating Android capability, which led to an entirely new group of Instagram users.
Eventually, the app incorporated ads, and it replaced the chronological order of the posts with an algorithmic
order. As the user base increased and its needs became more apparent, business pages were developed, plus
the ability to add a “story” and multiple pictures in a post.
Subsequent developments included “reels” and business Instagram shops. All of these developments and new
opportunities came about through the implementation of UCD—specifically, the use of tools that aimed to
better understand how users were interacting with the system. Instagram, much like other social media
platforms, is expected to continue to evolve as user needs change.
Special Design Considerations for Mobile Apps and Social Platforms
Accessing applications via mobile devices has increased as technology has literally shifted into people’s hands.
The marketplace for mobile applications is crowded with all types. When considering how to approach design
and development for mobile application use, recognize that applications differ in function and purpose based
on their user bases. Despite their variability, mobile applications generally belong to one of the following
categories:
•
Social media applications: Social media applications allow community-based sharing via communication
and collaboration. These applications lend themselves to connecting community members with shared
content, expanding social networks. Users are driven to check in on such apps almost daily. YouTube, a
popular social media platform, receives 2.6 billion users per day, and generated $29.2 billion dollars in
2022.3 Other popular social media applications include Facebook, TikTok, and WhatsApp.
•
Games and entertainment: The gaming and entertainment application space has expanded as accessibility
includes mobile devices, computers, televisions, and game consoles. These interactive applications house
activities related to leisure and fun. They are where content creators, marketing professionals, and artists
collaborate to create an enjoyable interactive experience that generates revenue. Popular applications
include Netflix, Hulu, Disney+, and Xbox Game Pass.
•
Lifestyle: Lifestyle apps support and define aspects related to a user’s lifestyle. For example, users who
watch HGTV can now access the HGTV application to watch shows they missed, get exclusive content from
hosts, and even enter sweepstakes. Other lifestyle applications include VRBO, Expedia, and Uber. Health-
care applications can also fall under the lifestyle umbrella. Many health-care organizations are
incorporating services via mobile technologies due to their ease of use, convenience, and reduced
administrative costs to the organization. The health-care insurance provider Humana, Inc., is an example
of a company using AI to improve operational efficiencies via mobile technologies.
•
Productivity: Productivity applications (such as Microsoft Office, Docusign, and Calendar) allow users to
manage tasks efficiently and effectively, leveraging the application’s speed and convenience. Thanks to
3
Mansoor Iqbal, “YouTube Revenue and Usage Statistics (2025),” Business of Apps, updated January 22, 2025,
https://www.businessofapps.com/data/youtube-statistics/
144
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

such applications, users may be able to handle basic banking transactions or sign an important document
from a variety of locations or devices.
•
News and information: News and information applications allow people to stay connected to current
events by presenting news and information in unique formats that appeal to their users. For example, the
Bleacher Report provides sports-related news and analysis, while Flipboard allows users to receive news
and analysis on sports, politics, international relations, and other topics.
•
Utility: Utility applications such as Calculator, Flashlight, and Weather may be preinstalled into a mobile
device, generally serving a single, quick purpose.
Today, many users of technology need to access websites, software, and applications on various platforms. For
example, employees who work from home may access a work software program via their tablet rather than
their desktop computer in the office. Social media users often access their accounts through their phone, but
they might also want to interact with an app through their smartwatch. It is important during the development
process to design the system so that it can meet the user requirements on various platforms with nearly the
same functionality. Specifically, website developers must incorporate making sure the website displays
correctly on a mobile device into the development process.
Effective systems offer a seamless user experience between devices and platforms, which means that the
functionality of the system is consistent for the user across various devices (such as phones, tablets, and
personal computers) and platforms (like Android, IoS, and Windows). In some cases, users appreciate when
applications are connected and integrated into other applications or software. This often occurs with products
within the same company such as with Meta, who owns Facebook and Instagram. When a user changes their
profile picture in one application, it is automatically updated in the other application. This can also occur with
integrations of systems that are not under the same company. For example, payments held in an Apple Wallet
on an iPhone can be integrated into a wide variety of shopping applications, and often that information is
saved in the shopping app so the user does not have to enter payment information each time. These are just a
few examples of how systems design has become more complicated over time as technology has changed and
user needs and requirements have evolved.
These are a few practical design considerations for developing mobile apps and social platforms:
•
Purpose and goals: Start by defining the purpose and goals for the application or platform. Do sufficient
research. Discover the latest trends in design that may boost usability.
•
Simplicity: Simple, functional designs with pleasing visualizations often generate buzz and increase the
number of return users. For example, a good design might incorporate a color palette, features a status
bar indicator to visually display the user’s progress, and directs the user to the next step through prompts.
•
Reliability: The design should be reliable, meaning users should be able to access it successfully 24/7. To
support this reliability, it should meet relevant speed and consistency standards. One dimension to
consider is the data network architecture and infrastructure. In addition, review the policies of the mobile
apps and social platforms to guard against misinformation (inaccurate or false information) and
disinformation (false information given with the intent to mislead).
•
Friendly navigation: Mobile app designs are most successful when they can be accessed well with friendly
navigation. Users should be able to navigate the site’s functions via their fingertips, voice commands, or
similar simple manners.
•
Platform compatible: Consider different platforms in the design to create a seamless user experience.
What works for iOS may not work for Android as the user interface may differ. Functional elements should
be minimal and consistent with the website, as this builds trust among users when they access the
application in either setting.
•
Social media integration: As users become more inclined to share information with others in their
communities and networks, social media integration may be a function that raises the design to another
level. Here are some questions to consider while integrating social media into an application: How well
does the application integrate with some of the popular social media applications? Would users want to
4.4 • Designing for Mobile Devices and Other Design Considerations
145

play games or compare outcomes with their friends and share the results on social media? How would this
functionality expand the reach of the application and its use? What types of push notifications or social
media application alerts would users need to have an optimal experience?
•
Financial: There is a broad range of money needed for mobile application development as features such as
push notifications, real-time updates, and third-party integrations may cause significant variations in
expense. These costs can range from $10,000 to $500,000, and projects can sometimes involve many
years of development.
LINK TO LEARNING
Read more about haptic technology that goes beyond the use of finger navigation (https://openstax.org/r/
109HapticTech) at the Smithsonian Magazine website.
GLOBAL CONNECTIONS
Messaging Apps Fill Global Gaps
People increasingly want the ability to connect with their communities wherever they may be physically
located across the globe. However, compatibility and coverage from carriers and service providers can pose
challenges. Messaging applications emerged in the mid-1990s in response to this international need, and
they gained in popularity because they provide an alternate communication method—via a user’s mobile
device—that is consistent with how people want to use technology to connect. Facebook Messenger,
WhatsApp, Google Hangouts, and BOSS Revolution are examples of such applications. To use them to
communicate, the user and receiver must have the application downloaded or be able to access it via a web
browser. These apps are cost-free and continue to advance in their technological capabilities, bridging
international communication gaps.
Guidelines for Mobile App Design
A good mobile design reflects the process undertaken by the development team, which ensure that the final
design is not merely an acceptable product for stakeholder use, but also one that supports a stakeholder need
and fosters continued use. Developers should also consider the impact of globalization on mobile app design,
both in terms of international regulatory standards and user needs. This might include offering features that
allow the user to select a language for the interface, and incorporating elements that are not regional or
specific to a single culture or ethnicity. The following guidelines should be considered when designing a
mobile application:
•
Strategy development and planning: Strategy development is a major first step in creating a mobile
application. It will help to define the direction and vision of the design and allow anticipation of future
industry trends. Here are several questions to consider in this phase: What are the strategic priorities of
the organization that are prompting this development? How will the application align with the business
goals? And, most important, what is the problem to be resolved or alleviated with the design? For
example, the organization may not have a mobile application for its customers to make purchases, inquire
about returns, and other general needs. Creating a mobile application may increase customer satisfaction
and generate exposure to the business, ultimately expanding the customer base. The development
process should seek to create positive experiences for its targeted users through its functionality. Create a
detailed plan that outlines the “why” to include an analysis of the problem, the overall goals, and how the
design will ultimately align with the organizational strategic goals, including data to support the plan.
•
User interface and user experience: These two elements work together within an application and should
146
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

be part of design consideration. The user interface (UI) is the point of interaction between the user and
the product. Designing with UI in mind involves considering elements and functions that the user may
encounter, and how the design responds to the user’s needs. The user experience (UE or UX) is a design
approach that integrates the user’s experience with the company, its services, and its products. UE looks at
the application design process from all aspects of a customer’s interactions with a company’s services. This
process requires a keen understanding of the user, their needs, and their interactions with the application
or system that is being designed. Much like the Agile approach, the UX approach keeps the user needs at
the forefront of the development process.
•
Application development, testing, and deployment: Taking into consideration the defined strategy and the
plan to integrate the UI/UE approach within the design, begin developing the application. Leverage user
stories, storyboards, and other visuals and mapping tools to outline the user’s steps as they navigate the
application. Does the design provide consistency? Are its core features available? Is the text legible? Is the
navigation simple? Is it usable across platforms and with its web-enabled version (if available)? Does the
design anticipate its user’s needs, leading users to a positive end result and user experience? Review the
design to validate that it meets the business and user requirements. Test the design to identify bugs or
glitches that may impact its use, functionality, and performance (such as load times). Consider extending
testing to a focus group, which is a group of individuals assembled to discuss their opinions on a product
or service, as their insight could direct the future use of the product. Once the mobile design is validated,
deploy the application and watch it in use.
•
Application support and performance monitoring: Continue to monitor the mobile application via statistics
and reporting methods to gauge its usability. Monitor user feedback and performance metrics, leveraging
the resulting data to update future design iterations, if necessary.
CAREERS IN IS
Mobile Application Developer
A mobile application developer writes software programs for mobile applications across platforms, and
they may be involved in the testing and future maintenance or updating of applications. These technical
professionals work in a wide variety of industries. Other professionals who create similar, user-friendly
software applications are software engineers, web designers, and iOS developers. A minimum of a
bachelor’s degree, industry certifications, and the completion of internships or entry-level work experience
are generally expected to start .
Guidelines for Website Design and Usability
Have you ever visited a website and regretted it immediately? Why? Was the site hard to navigate, visually
unappealing, or slow to load? Did you not find the information you were looking for? Examples of poor
usability include a landing page that features several issues that contribute to an unprofessional look, such as
too much information as text, uneven header and footer, and a lack of white space.
Certain common problems associated with web design often lead websites to their demise if not corrected.
Unfortunately, many website owners do not even realize that their sites have these problems. Although these
guidelines are not all universally applicable, following them can help web development teams to make sure
websites are user friendly:
•
Follow web content accessibility guidelines: The term accessibility refers to the practice of making
products, services, and environments usable by as many people as possible, especially by ensuring that
digital resources are available to individuals with disabilities. W3C is a Web Accessibility Initiative
organization that maintains guidelines, strategies, standards, and resources for web design. It continues
to expand its web content accessibility guidelines (WCAG) to incorporate accessibility guidelines for
4.4 • Designing for Mobile Devices and Other Design Considerations
147

organizations and individuals around the world. These international standards focus on a variety of
information and content located on websites, from code to the presentation of the resulting text, images,
and sound.
•
Maintain common design elements: Design elements should be functionally minimal. Content should be
clear and legible, and related ideas should be located in close proximity to each other and organized,
through hierarchies, into common categories. Images, text, and sound elements should meet accessibility
standards.
•
Simplify navigation: A good website is easy to navigate and users are able to locate items quickly when
they land on the site. Search or lookup features should be readily available and functional, and they should
return targeted results based on the search input.
•
Optimize for mobile devices: Most users now access websites via their mobile device. The use of a
responsive design will allow the website’s design themes and associated content to adjust to match and
reconfigure themselves for mobile use.
A strong design features accessible font styles and colors along with being easy to navigate. The font is clear,
well organized, and visually appealing. Good website design uses images, text, and sound elements that are
within accessibility standards.
FUTURE TECHNOLOGY
Low Code and No Code
Low Code and No Code are two future technologies of mobile design that allow users with little to no
programming or software development experience to build applications for business use. Drag-and-drop
features of computerized models with prebuilt coded instructions and functions can be used to create
valuable business applications. These technologies generate value by replacing legacy systems, providing
interoperability options, being easy to use, and offering reduced development time compared with
traditional development.
148
4 • Systems Analysis, Design, and Development
Access for free at openstax.org

Key Terms
accessibility
practice of making products, services, and environments usable by as many people as possible,
especially by ensuring that digital resources are available to individuals with disabilities
Agile
approach of iterative and incremental delivery of quality products and value to stakeholders using
team collaboration, flexibility, and continuous planning
Agile software development
adaptive approach to software development that considers uncertainty in
rapidly changing environments and allows Agile teams to respond to those changes to deliver smaller,
consumable work packages quickly
As-Is/To-Be process map
visualization that details the “current state” and “future state,” respectively, of a
specific process or function within an information system; the As-Is process map details how things
currently work, while the To-Be process map describes what should be done to reach the desired future
state
business problem
any obstacle to business operations that causes variance in the expected outcome
client/server architecture
tiered architecture in which a central computer (server) operates the network and
allocates resources to the equipment connected to the network
computer-aided design (CAD)
design approach in which computers are used to assist in the design process,
including in the creation, development, modification, or optimization of design systems
context diagram
high-level diagram that visualizes a system or parts of a system and the environmental
actors with which it interacts using diagrammatic arrows to display the flow of data
data cycle
different stages that data pass through while they exist in an organization’s system, from initial
generation onward
data design
aspect of systems design wherein data and the actionable components resulting from the
systems analysis process are translated from their raw formats and combined into understandable formats
data dictionary
database that houses the details of system data, their properties, entity relationships, and
any reference documentation
data flow diagram (DFD)
graphical representation of the information flow of a process or system
design diagram
simplistic drawing, or elaborate depiction, that helps design teams as it is simple to
understand, universally accepted, and easy to compare
enterprise
another term for a business, organization, or company
enterprise network architecture
includes pertinent business functions and provides and illustrates the
technical architecture, including the dependencies and connectivity of various applications
entity relationship diagram (ERD)
visual representation of the data flow and its relationship among people,
objects, events, places, or concepts
flowchart
visualization that displays sequential relationships between data, systems, programs, or processes
and is often used by technical and nontechnical persons to document, plan, and communicate ideas in a
simple-to-understand visual format
focus group
group of individuals assembled to discuss their opinions on a product or service
functional requirement
feature or function of an application that is needed for the affected business areas
to accomplish its tasks
interface design
design of the visual layout and functional elements of a product or system that involves
using an understanding of people and processes to drive the final design outcomes
iterative
process that is applied repeatedly
mind map
free-form depiction of ideas with branches displaying the flow of information and thoughts;
generally used for brainstorming activities
network
system of interconnected computers and other devices that allow for the exchange of data and
information (such as files) and the sharing of resources (such as printers)
network architecture
top-level view of the system that defines the equipment in the network and the
interaction between the equipment
network design
focuses on the specific implementation and configuration of a network to meet the
4 • Key Terms
149

requirements of a particular organization or application
network protocol
set of rules and guidelines that determines how data are exchanged between network
devices
nonfunctional requirement
attribute of the system that enhances its functionality or operation and is often
viewed as an item that describes the general properties of the system or how the system should behave
and work
peer-to-peer (P2P) architecture
architecture in which computers on the network are all given the same
opportunity to use resources on the network
process design
activity generally used by businesses to further understand its processes and how to improve
them
prototype
design approach wherein systems designers and users create a small-scale representation or
working model of the solution
requirements traceability matrix (RTM)
spreadsheet or similar document used to record each user
requirement along with supplemental information (such as type, description, objective, justification,
priority, department, and status) that assists with the review, testing, and confirmation of requirements
responsive design
approach that allows design themes and associated content to adjust to match and
reconfigure itself for mobile use
retrospective meeting
meeting in the Agile software development process at which sprints are discussed in
detail and areas of improvement to apply to future sprints are identified
software development life cycle (SDLC)
framework that defines the stages of software development, from
inception to retirement
sprint
time-based period, generally between one and six weeks, that represents a delivery cycle during which
the specified work is completed and reviewed
stakeholder
individual or group who has a vested interest or concern of a business decision; may be internal
or external to an organization and may include the community, government entities, employees,
customers, investors, suppliers, or trade unions/associations
stand-up
ten- to thirty-minute daily meeting to discuss the development process and any changes that are
needed during sprints
system design process
methodology that determines and defines the architecture, interfaces, and data for a
system to ensure that it satisfies the specified requirements
system documentation
reference information used to describe the system and its parts and used to
understand the functioning of the system
systems analysis
identifies the opportunities discovered by examining business problems and identifying
possible solutions the business may undertake
systems analyst
professional whose primary functions are to utilize systems analysis and design techniques
to support information systems and solve challenges that arise when using information systems
systems design
organizational approach to improving on an existing system or to developing a newer one
systems design task list
road map through each step of the design process, allowing teams to have an
organized workflow and make informed decisions at each step
UML diagram
broad category of tools that are commonly used in systems analysis and design
usability
quality-related attribute that assesses an interface’s ease of use
use case diagram
visual representation of system features that displays how specific users interact with the
specific functions of a system
user experience (UE or UX)
design approach that encompasses the user’s experience with the company, its
services, and its products
user interface (UI)
point of user interaction with the product that incorporates the elements, functions, and
responsiveness of the design that the user may encounter
user requirements
aspects of a solution that are specified by stakeholders and needed to support the
specific needs and expectations of a business process or product
user-centered design (UCD)
iterative, and stepwise, approach to development that considers the user’s
150
4 • Key Terms
Access for free at openstax.org

needs, behaviors, and preferences
web content accessibility guidelines (WCAG)
guidelines for web and digital design that integrate
accessibility into the product and user experience
Summary
4.1 Systems Analysis and Design for Application Development
•
Systems analysis and design is a stepwise process for evaluating and developing information systems by
understanding the needs of the business to improve on or develop effective and efficient functioning
solutions to technical challenges.
•
The benefits of systems analysis and design include the identification of operational efficiencies achieved
by improvements to existing systems, the alignment of system functionality with organizational strategic
objectives, early risk identification of potential threats to processes, the minimization or reduction of
resources and costs, and the overall improved quality, efficiency, productivity, and usability of the system.
•
A systems analyst is a professional whose primary functions are to utilize systems analysis and design
techniques to support information systems and solve challenges presented when using information
systems.
•
Systems design generally involves the following activities: designing the data, interface design, and
process design. The tools used in systems analysis and design are varied and aid in the understanding of
the system in its current and/or future state.
•
SDLC is a framework that defines the stages of software development, from its inception to its retirement,
providing a blueprint of the tasks to be completed for each stage of the cycle: analysis, design,
development, testing, deployment, and maintenance.
•
Agile is an iterative approach to software development that considers uncertainty in changing
environments and allows Agile teams to respond to those changes quickly to deliver smaller, consumable
work packages. The Manifesto for Agile Software Development maintains the four Agile Manifesto values
and describes how Agile development works, including the planning and preparation involved and the
importance of sprint planning.
•
An analysis and design team includes members such as the designer, systems architect, user experience
researcher, and systems analyst, among other important participants in the systems analysis and design
process.
4.2 Defining the Business Problem and User Requirements
•
Defining the business problem is multifaceted and includes asking directed questions to uncover the
issues that need to be addressed and the problem at hand.
•
Various tools can be used to understand user needs and how users will interact with the system. These
include both visual tools, such as flowcharts, and textual tools, such as user stories.
•
Not having complete or correct user requirements can delay a project and result in additional costs. Taking
time up front will save valuable resources in the long run.
•
Through proper planning in the early stages of systems development, analysts can feel confident in
delivering a system that works for the stakeholders and meets the user requirements.
4.3 Technical Design Methodologies and Practical Applications
•
The systems design process defines the architecture, interfaces, and data for a system that satisfies the
specified requirements.
•
Systems designs can be logical (a high-level view of the system, including actors and the relationships
between the actors and the system) or physical (the specific hardware and software components, along
with detailed systems diagrams and layout of the systems).
•
Data move through the system in a cycle from initial data creation to the eventual archiving or destruction
of the data.
4 • Summary
151

•
Prototypes are used for early detection of problems, expanded user engagement, increased satisfaction
with the final product, and greater savings of time and money associated with rework. CAD is used by
designers and engineers because of its ease of visualization, level of detail, capacity for specialization, and
ability to optimize products and render a physical product, which can greatly inform the design process.
•
Input/output control is a component of the design process. Input is the raw data that are processed
through the functions of the system. It is controlled by the directives used to submit responses into the
system by the user, producing an output according to the system logic. Output is the information delivered
to users through an information system; it is the data that result from the inputs being processed
according to the system logic.
•
A systems design task list provides a road map through each step of the design process, allowing teams to
have an organized workflow and make informed decisions through each step.
•
The enterprise network system is composed of interconnected computers and other devices that allow for
the exchange of data and information and the sharing of resources.
•
The most commonly used network architectures are peer-to-peer and client/server.
4.4 Designing for Mobile Devices and Other Design Considerations
•
User-centered design (UCD) creates a product that uses an interdisciplinary approach to design with focus
on the user experience and feedback. Applying user feedback to guide the design process strengthens the
output of the design and creates a relationship with the user.
•
UCD is iterative in nature and includes the practices of building, refining, and improving a product, project,
or initiative.
•
Best practices associated with a UCD approach include defining the business goals, understanding users
and aligning business goals, generating the design solution, evaluating the final product, and continuing
to refine the product.
•
Mobile applications require special design considerations. This includes keeping the flow simple,
highlighting key features of the application, and designing features for touch screens.
•
Effective website design includes making sure accessibility standards are met for images, text, and sound.
The website design should also incorporate mobile accessibility in the process.
Review Questions
1. What is a drawback of systems analysis and design?
a. delays early identification of potential threats to processes
b. increases resources and general costs
c. prevents the alignment of strategic objectives
d. decreases quality, efficiency, productivity, and usability of the system
2. What is the tool used in systems analysis and design that documents the details of the design?
a. simulation
b. data flow diagram
c. pseudocode
d. data dictionary
3. What is a statement that best characterizes the Agile software development process?
a. It is a linear approach to software development and proceeds sequentially from one stage to the next.
b. There are no considerations for environmental changes.
c. The final work product is delivered in one package at the end of the process.
d. It values individuals and interactions over processes and tools.
4. What is a responsibility of the systems architect role?
a. to conduct user testing to validate ideas
b. to create the hardware, software, and network systems
152
4 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

c. to create and test software solutions
d. to detail the technical specifications of the system
5. A small start-up is developing a mobile app and has limited resources. The team wants to release a basic
version of the app quickly, gather feedback, and make iterative improvements based on that feedback.
The team also expects some changes to the app’s features as they learn more about user needs. Given
these conditions, which of the following best describes the most suitable approach for the team?
a. Use a Waterfall approach to ensure all features are fully developed and tested before the first release,
preventing any major changes after the launch.
b. Follow an Agile development process to focus on delivering a minimum viable product (MVP), gather
user feedback, and iterate on the app with each new release.
c. Adopt a hybrid approach, combining elements of Agile and Waterfall, to maintain flexibility in
development while still following a strict, sequential timeline.
d. Use a Rapid Application Development (RAD) model to complete the app’s features as quickly as
possible, with minimal user involvement during the development process.
6. What is the purpose of the five-whys method?
a. to determine solutions to the business problem or opportunity
b. to evaluate the solution
c. to evaluate the options presented
d. to define the problem
7. What would indicate that an update or reassessment of the user requirements is needed?
a. documented processes
b. early delivery of the product
c. meeting user functional requirements
d. increased costs
8. Dr. Singh could benefit from having a systems analyst support her business problems and opportunities.
How could Dr. Singh leverage this resource most efficiently?
a. by focusing on opening the new practice location and not addressing challenges within the current
practice
b. by engaging all stakeholders in discussions with the systems analyst to gain a comprehensive
understanding of the business problems and opportunities
c. by fixing the problems in the current practice and delaying the opening of a new office
d. by purchasing a system “off the shelf” and adjusting the business to fit the new system
9. What is an example that demonstrates the importance of clearly defining business problems and user
requirements at the start of a systems development project?
a. Focusing on user requirements can prevent misunderstandings during the development process but
will not influence project costs or timeline.
b. Incomplete or incorrect user requirements may lead to significant delays and increased costs, but
addressing them in early stages helps avoid costly changes later.
c. Analyzing user needs only at the final stages of development ensures that the system meets
stakeholder expectations without wasting resources.
d. Relying on visual tools, such as flowcharts, exclusively, will guarantee that user needs are fully
understood and eliminate the risk of project delays.
10. When should the systems design process begin?
a. before the business problem is defined, prior to completing a systems analysis, during the
requirements gathering process, and prior to the generation of design diagrams
b. after the business problem is defined, prior to completing a systems analysis, during the requirements
gathering process, and after the generation of design diagrams
4 • Review Questions
153

c. after the business problem is defined, after completing a systems analysis, after completion of the
requirements gathering process, and after the generation of design diagrams
d. after the business problem is defined, prior to completing a systems analysis, during the requirements
gathering process, and prior to the generation of design diagrams
11. What differentiates logical designs from physical designs?
a. Logical designs include the specific hardware that will be used in the system.
b. Physical designs incorporate business processes to visually represent the flow of data and the
relationships between them.
c. Logical designs provide a high-level representation of the system.
d. Physical designs are used to build out the logical design.
12. Why are communications protocols part of the network?
a. They help diagnose connectivity issues.
b. They allow for the exchange of data and information.
c. They allow for the connectivity of most devices.
d. They ensure safe data transmission.
13. Which statement best illustrates the importance of the systems design process in ensuring a successful
project outcome?
a. A systems design focuses primarily on choosing the right hardware to meet performance
requirements, ensuring the system functions as expected.
b. The systems design process creates detailed architectural and data specifications, balancing logical
and physical components, while also identifying potential issues early through prototypes and iterative
design.
c. A systems design is only about developing the user interface, focusing primarily on aesthetics and ease
of use.
d. The systems design process is mainly concerned with generating the necessary documentation and
does not need to consider user feedback or future scalability.
14. What is a key goal of using a user-centered design approach?
a. providing the cheapest solution to the user in the quickest time frame
b. integrating customer feedback once during the development process
c. developing detailed documentation reports of the system functionality
d. utilizing user input throughout the process to provide the best solution to meet the needs of the users
15. Why is it important to conduct research before designing a mobile application?
a. Research helps create an app with the least amount of time and cost.
b. Research tells you how to design the product.
c. Research prevents costly mistakes and major changes later in the design process.
d. Research provides new revelations about user needs.
16. What is a consideration for mobile application design?
a. trendiness in design
b. predetermined response time
c. finger-friendly navigation
d. complex but functional design
17. What is a true statement about UI and UE?
a. UI and UE work independently of each other.
b. There is minimal difference between UI and UE.
c. UE considers the interaction of the user with the design.
d. UI looks at the design process, encompassing the user’s experience with all aspects of the company’s
154
4 • Review Questions
Access for free at openstax.org

services.
18. Which statement best describes the role of iterative design and user feedback in a user-centered design
(UCD) approach for product creation?
a. Iterative design ensures that the product is perfect from the start, avoiding the need for user feedback
after the initial launch.
b. User feedback in UCD is only relevant during the initial concept phase, and iteration focuses solely on
technical performance.
c. UCD uses continuous user feedback to guide iterative improvements, creating a product that aligns
closely with user needs and business goals.
d. Iterative design in UCD is focused primarily on aesthetic improvements, deprioritizing functionality and
accessibility requirements.
Check Your Understanding Questions
1. Describe the concept of systems analysis and design.
2. Explain the SDLC process in your own words.
3. Identify methodologies and tools in systems analysis.
4. What would be your preferred tool to use to complete a systems analysis and why?
5. What importance does each of the roles and responsibilities ascribed to the analysis and design team
have?
6. Why is it important for businesses to solve business problems? Explain.
7. Explain the purpose of a requirements traceability matrix (RTM).
8. If you had to create a design diagram to communicate two different solutions to Dr. Singh for her
problem/opportunity, which design diagram would you use and why?
9. What might be some of the challenges associated with the requirements gathering process?
10. What are the aspects of a good systems design?
11. What are the fundamental differences between logical and physical designs?
12. What are some pros and cons of creating a prototype?
13. Why is it important that the enterprise network architecture be considered in developing and designing
an application?
14. Why is user-centered design important?
15. When should strategic development and planning occur in the mobile application development process,
and what is the importance of this step?
16. Would you consider UI or UE more important? Explain how you would prioritize features of a website
design.
17. Explain how globalization affects mobile application design.
Application Questions
1. Reflect on the Agile methodology and the characteristics of Agile teams:
a.
How might the Agile approach be applied to a team project for a class you are in that lasts the
duration of the term and has a final presentation and paper due the last week of the term?
b.
What is your ideal time period for a sprint for a semester-long team project that you are assigned and
4 • Check Your Understanding Questions
155

why?
c.
What tools would you use to maintain engagement in the project?
2. In a small group or on your own, reflect on a business problem in your current organization (work or
school).
a.
Identify an opportunity for improvement in your organization’s function or operation.
b.
Who would you enlist to assist with requirements gathering?
c.
What tools will you use to assist your efforts?
d.
What are some other factors you should consider?
3. Discuss the inputs and outputs that could be present in Dr. Singh’s system. Include how the data move
through the data cycle in the system.
4. Reflect on a website or a mobile application that you frequently use or visit.
a.
Discuss what you like and dislike about the website or mobile application. How would you describe its
usability?
b.
If you have any dislikes, why do you continue to visit this website? Are there competitor websites, and
how do they differ?
c.
Does the website or mobile application allow you to submit user feedback? If so, have you ever
submitted feedback on the website’s usability? Why or why not?
156
4 • Application Questions
Access for free at openstax.org
