112 
CHAPTER 5:  CLASSIFICATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
 
 
 
 
To answer the central research question—whether an existing strategy or other document 
exists to provide organizations at multiple levels of society with enough support for improving 
cyber resilience—Chapters 3 and 4 developed the interdisciplinary concept of resilience, a 
dictionary of cyber and resilience terminology, and a classification framework from which to 
evaluate 37 cyber-oriented texts against that question. The use of twelve non-cyber, resilience 
texts provides a pseudo-control group for comparison, since those documents intuitively should 
have higher resilience content than the cyber texts. The analysis in the previous chapter revealed 
that the cyber texts potentially validated research Hypothesis 4 since the semantic analyses 
indicated that, even though resilience was mentioned, the content tended to focus on the 
technical and sociotechnical aspects of cybersecurity only. To confirm that finding, this chapter 
will evaluate the texts individually, as opposed to collectively as a corpus, against the cyber 
resilience dictionary and the classification framework.  
 
 
Classifying the Documents for Topics Associated with Time and Scale  
 
The classification framework developed in the previous chapter evaluates each text on the 
basis of how well the terminology in the text corresponds to the descriptors across both the time 
and scale dimensions of resilience. The framework uses Fibonacci numbering to connote the 
non-linearity of each scale. As a recap, the time classifiers are coded as:  
 2: Immediate – seconds to minutes; machine speed 
 3: Short – hours to days, and the benchmark for human capacity 
 5: Mid = weeks to months  

113 
 8: Long – an extended period, on the order of months, but more likely years  
 13: Generational – multiple decades to centuries 
For the scale classifiers:  
 2: Technical – individual technical components with little to no human interaction 
 3: Sociotechnical – the combination of technical systems that require continual human 
interaction 
 5: Organizational – the human side of sociotechnical, where human-driven activities take 
place 
 8: Community/Sector – above the organization and how it fits into a broader ecosystem 
 13: National/International – actions at the national or international scale 
Appendix 1 contains the final dictionary of terms with their time and scale classifiers.  
The 49 texts were processed through a script that created a classification analyzer 
algorithm. The Python script used the following packages to implement: os (v3.13), json 
(v3.13), matplotlib (v3.8), Seaborn (v0.12.2), pandas (v2.1.4), and NumPy (v1.24.3) 
[125-130]. The texts were processed individually, and the mean and standard deviation of time 
and scale values stored as a json file for follow-on analysis. Each text, and the corpus of 49 
texts, were visualized using a contour plot. The initial, combined plot of the results is shown 
below in Figure 31. The word clouds were generated with a separate script implementing a tf*idf 
analysis and using the above packages along with scikit-learn (v1.4.2) and WordCloud 
(v1.9.3) [71], [131].  
 

114 
 
Figure 31: Contour plot with Fibonacci scaling representing the classification of 49 texts for aspects of resilience across time 
and scale. 
 
As predicted in Chapter 2 with the motivating research question and Hypothesis 1, none 
of the existing body of documents, to include the twelve non-cyber texts used as a pseudo-
control group, contain topics associated with resilience at all levels of time and scale. It is 
unreasonable to assume that specific cybersecurity guidance would contain discrete topics 

115 
associated with long-term or greater effects at the community/sector level or above. That should 
be the realm of national cyber resilience strategies. The resilience strategies for both the United 
States and Ukraine were in the twelve non-cyber texts, and the lack of coverage on the combined 
contour plot indicates that, at least according to the analytical procedures used in this research, 
even these strategies lack elements across time and scale related to cyber resilience. Figure 32 
and Figure 33, below, show the contour plots for the cyber and non-cyber texts for comparison. 
Note the contouring scale differences between the two plots, though the same general 
distribution and dispersion of the features from classification remains visually consistent 
between the two bodies of texts.  

116 
 
Figure 32: Contour plot showing the classification of resilience features across time and scale for 37 cyber texts. 

117 
 
Figure 33: Contour plot showing the classification of resilience features across time and scale for twelve non-cyber texts. 
 
 
 

118 
Numerical Results from the Classification Algorithm 
 
From the classification, the mean time and scale values for each document can be 
calculated, along with the mean values for the cyber, non-cyber, and full corpus of documents. 
Given the plot densities shown in Figure 31, the mean values are somewhere between 2-3 for 
time and scale. Figure 34, below, shows the data for these mean values, with the accompanying 
standard deviations, in box plot format. The mean values for the three sets were between 2.65-
2.73 for the time parameter and 2.33-2.68 for the scale parameters. 
 
Figure 34: Box plots of the mean time and scale values from the classification algorithm, with their standard deviations, for the 
combined, cyber, and non-cyber documents. 
The non-cyber texts had slightly higher mean values, but the results are well within the standard 
deviation for the combined corpus for the time values to be not statistically significant. There are 
significant changes in the scale values and these can be attributed to the fact that those twelve 
documents were primarily targeting audiences at the community/sector to national-international 
levels, so that the language would necessarily be classified into that range over the technical and 
sociotechnical range.  

119 
 
For additional clarity on how the two sets of documents classified, Figure 35, below, 
shows the plotted mean time and scale values for each document, coded by whether the 
document was cyber or non-cyber.  
 
Figure 35: Scatter plot of the mean time and scale values for each of the 49 texts, coded by color for inclusion in the cyber or 
non-cyber texts groupings. 

120 
The zoomed in graphic shows the tight grouping of the mean time and scale values for the 
distribution of documents. As is visually apparent, there is no significant clustering between the 
cyber and non-cyber texts, as the markers are commingled.   
 
Documents with the Highest Mean Time and Scale Values 
 
Intuitively, the higher the mean value for time or scale for a given document, the broader 
the coverage across all levels of time or scale. The combined plot of all documents, Figure 31, 
reveals that the corpus does not have any coverage at the highest levels of time or scale, which is 
understandable and expected. The contour indicates that the majority of the features in the 
combined corpus are primarily at the lower ends of the scales. For the cyber and non-cyber 
subgroupings of documents, the two documents that had the highest mean time and scale values, 
and thus the most likely to contain guidance that might satisfy Hypothesis 1, were:  
 Draft NIST Special Publication 1800-35 Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture [149] 
 Community System Resilience Initiative Steering Committee Final Report [176] 
An in-depth, qualitative analysis of each document would be necessary to identify which topics 
and features the algorithm extracted that drove the classification to the maximum mean values 
from the corpus. But from the contour plots of both documents, in Figure 36 and Figure 38, it is 
clear that while the preponderance of features are at the technical to sociotechnical and short 
time scales, there is a greater proportion of features that classify at higher values of both time and 
scale, especially at the organizational level for scale and mid-term time level. A word cloud 
analysis for both documents, in Figure 37 and Figure 39, shows the top fifty terms in each text, 

121 
providing a rapid look at whether the language is different enough to drive the higher mean 
scores.  
 
 
Figure 36: Contour plot of the highest scoring cyber document from the classification algorithm, the draft NIST Special 
Publication 1800-35 Implementing a Zero Trust Architecture [149]. 
 

122 
 
Figure 37: Word cloud analysis of the top fifty terms from a tf*idf analysis on the draft NIST SP 1800-35 Implementing a Zero 
Trust Architecture [149]. 

123 
 
Figure 38: Contour plot of the highest scoring non-cyber document from the classification algorithm, the Community System 
Resilience Initiative Steering Committee Final Report [176]. 
 

124 
 
Figure 39: Word cloud analysis of the top fifty terms from a tf*idf analysis on the Community System Resilience Initiative 
Steering Committee Final Report [176]. 
 
As Figure 39 indicates, the language is closer to the terms identified in Chapter 3, and markedly 
different from the language used in the cyber texts analyzed in Chapter 4. Figure 37, however, 
reveals that the high mean score is likely, however, reveals that the high mean score is most 
likely a flaw in the classification algorithm—a false positive, per se—rather than the text being 
fundamentally different from the other cyber texts in terms of its cyber resilience content. The 
top fifty terms in that text closely mirror the technical language in the other cyber texts, as 
identified in Chapter 4. Zero trust principles are a key concept for developing robust systems and 
resilience, but NIST SP 1800-35 does not appear to offer guidance at all levels of time and scale 
for improving cyber resilience based on this analysis.  
 
 

125 
Comparison to Explicit Cyber Resilience and National Resilience Strategies 
 
This final section considers several documents that explicitly identify cyber resilience or 
national resilience as their stated objectives. While the combined contour plot in Figure 31 
includes the results of those documents, the analysis here is meant to reinforce the conclusions 
thus far with respect to the primary research question and Hypothesis 1: does a single document 
exist to provide organizations at multiple levels of society with support for improving cyber 
resilience? These three documents appear to be the closest, colloquially, to meeting that intent:  
 World Economic Forum’s Cyber Resilience Index [164] 
 National Resilience Strategy of the United States [170] 
 Ukraine’s strategy on National Resilience in a Changing Security Environment [171] 
 The set of contour plots and word clouds for these documents follow.  

126 
 
Figure 40: Contour plot from the classification algorithm for the World Economic Forum's Cyber Resilience Index [164]. 
 

127 
 
Figure 41: Word cloud analysis of the top fifty terms from a tf*idf analysis on the World Economic Forum's Cyber Resilience 
Index [164]. 

128 
 
Figure 42: Contour plot from the classification algorithm for the National Resilience Strategy of the United States [170]. 
 

129 
 
Figure 43: Word cloud analysis of the top fifty terms from a tf*idf analysis on the National Resilience Strategy of the United 
States [170]. 

130 
 
Figure 44: Contour plot from the classification algorithm for Ukraine's National Resilience in a Changing Security Environment 
[171]. 
 

131 
 
Figure 45: Word cloud analysis of the top fifty terms from a tf*idf analysis on Ukraine's strategy on National Resilience in a 
Changing Security Environment [171].  
 
All three texts show a better distribution of features across multiple scales compared to the body 
of cyber texts, with greater frequencies of topics at the organizational or community levels for 
scale and the longer time scales, emphasizing a broader reach of the strategies and greater 
guidance. However, the national strategies of the United States and Ukraine are not meant to 
provide individual organizations or communities with guidance to improve resilience; instead, 
they are meant to align national priorities and resources to achieve national-level resilience 
outcomes. The World Economic Forum’s Cyber Resilience Index qualitatively comes the closest 
to meeting the objective sought by the research question, but a more thorough analysis of that 
document would be needed to assess it for improvements to address all aspects of time and scale 
for improving cyber resilience.  
 
 
 
